
1. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2019 Jun 21. doi: 10.1097/CORR.0000000000000848. [Epub
ahead of print]

What Are the Applications and Limitations of Artificial Intelligence for Fracture
Detection and Classification in Orthopaedic Trauma Imaging? A Systematic Review.

Langerhuizen DWG(1), Janssen SJ, Mallee WH, van den Bekerom MPJ, Ring D,
Kerkhoffs GMMJ, Jaarsma RL, Doornberg JN.

Author information: 
(1)D. W. G. Langerhuizen, R. L. Jaarsma, J. N. Doornberg, Flinders University,
Department of Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery, Flinders Medical Centre, Adelaide, 
Australia S. J. Janssen, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Amphia Hospital,
Breda, the Netherlands W. H. Mallee, G. M. M. J. Kerkhoffs, Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Amsterdam Movement Sciences, Amsterdam University Medical
Centre, Amsterdam, the Netherlands M. P. J. van den Bekerom, Department of
Orthopaedic Surgery, Onze Lieve Vrouwe Gasthuis, Amsterdam, the Netherlands D.
Ring, Department of Surgery and Perioperative Care, Dell Medical School, the
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Artificial-intelligence algorithms derive rules and patterns from
large amounts of data to calculate the probabilities of various outcomes using
new sets of similar data. In medicine, artificial intelligence (AI) has been
applied primarily to image-recognition diagnostic tasks and evaluating the
probabilities of particular outcomes after treatment. However, the performance
and limitations of AI in the automated detection and classification of fractures 
has not been examined comprehensively.
QUESTION/PURPOSES: In this systematic review, we asked (1) What is the proportion
of correctly detected or classified fractures and the area under the receiving
operating characteristic (AUC) curve of AI fracture detection and classification 
models? (2) What is the performance of AI in this setting compared with the
performance of human examiners?
METHODS: The PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane databases were systematically searched 
from the start of each respective database until September 6, 2018, using terms
related to "fracture", "artificial intelligence", and "detection, prediction, or 
evaluation." Of 1221 identified studies, we retained 10 studies: eight studies
involved fracture detection (ankle, hand, hip, spine, wrist, and ulna), one
addressed fracture classification (diaphyseal femur), and one addressed both
fracture detection and classification (proximal humerus). We registered the
review before data collection (PROSPERO: CRD42018110167) and used the Preferred
Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-analyses (PRISMA). We reported
the range of the accuracy and AUC for the performance of the predicted fracture
detection and/or classification task. An AUC of 1.0 would indicate perfect
prediction, whereas 0.5 would indicate a prediction is no better than a
flip-of-a-coin. We conducted quality assessment using a seven-item checklist
based on a modified methodologic index for nonrandomized studies instrument
(MINORS).
RESULTS: For fracture detection, the AUC in five studies reflected near perfect
prediction (range, 0.95-1.0) , and the accuracy in seven studies ranged from 83% 
to 98%. For fracture classification, the AUC was 0.94 in one study, and the
accuracy in two studies ranged from 77% to 90%. In two studies AI outperformed
human examiners for detecting and classifying hip and proximal humerus fractures,
and one study showed equivalent performance for detecting wrist, hand and ankle
fractures.
CONCLUSIONS: Preliminary experience with fracture detection and classification
using AI shows promising performance. AI may enhance processing and communicating
probabilistic tasks in medicine, including orthopaedic surgery. At present,
inadequate reference standard assignments to train and test AI is the biggest
hurdle before integration into clinical workflow. The next step will be to apply 
AI to more challenging diagnostic and therapeutic scenarios when there is absence
of certitude. Future studies should also seek to address legal regulation and
better determine feasibility of implementation in clinical practice.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Level II, diagnostic study.

DOI: 10.1097/CORR.0000000000000848 
PMID: 31283727 


2. Diagn Progn Res. 2019 Jun 20;3:12. doi: 10.1186/s41512-019-0058-5. eCollection
2019.

Development and validation of a novel prediction model to identify patients in
need of specialized trauma care during field triage: design and rationale of the 
GOAT study.

van der Sluijs R(1)(2)(3), Debray TPA(4)(5), Poeze M(1), Leenen LPH(2), van Heijl
M(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Traumatology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht,
The Netherlands.
(2)2Department of Traumatology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Surgery, Diakonessenhuis Utrecht/Zeist/Doorn, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.
(4)4Julius Center for Health Sciences and Primary Care, University Medical Center
Utrecht, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(5)5Cochrane Netherlands, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht University, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Background: Adequate field triage of trauma patients is crucial to transport
patients to the right hospital. Mistriage and subsequent interhospital transfers 
should be minimized to reduce avoidable mortality, life-long disabilities, and
costs. Availability of a prehospital triage tool may help to identify patients in
need of specialized trauma care and to determine the optimal transportation
destination.
Methods: The GOAT (Gradient Boosted Trauma Triage) study is a prospective,
multi-site, cross-sectional diagnostic study. Patients transported by at least
five ground Emergency Medical Services to any receiving hospital within the
Netherlands are eligible for inclusion. The reference standards for the need of
specialized trauma care are an Injury Severity Score ≥ 16 and early critical
resource use, which will both be assessed by trauma registrars after the final
diagnosis is made. Variable selection will be based on ease of use in practice
and clinical expertise. A gradient boosting decision tree algorithm will be used 
to develop the prediction model. Model accuracy will be assessed in terms of
discrimination (c-statistic) and calibration (intercept, slope, and plot) on
individual participant's data from each participating cluster (i.e., Emergency
Medical Service) through internal-external cross-validation. A reference model
will be externally validated on each cluster as well. The resulting model
statistics will be investigated, compared, and summarized through an individual
participant's data meta-analysis.
Discussion: The GOAT study protocol describes the development of a new prediction
model for identifying patients in need of specialized trauma care. The aim is to 
attain acceptable undertriage rates and to minimize mortality rates and life-long
disabilities.

DOI: 10.1186/s41512-019-0058-5 
PMCID: PMC6584978
PMID: 31245626 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interestsThe authors declare that they 
have no competing interests.


3. N Engl J Med. 2019 Jun 27;380(26):2497-2505. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa1812757.

Detection of Brain Activation in Unresponsive Patients with Acute Brain Injury.

Claassen J(1), Doyle K(1), Matory A(1), Couch C(1), Burger KM(1), Velazquez A(1),
Okonkwo JU(1), King JR(1), Park S(1), Agarwal S(1), Roh D(1), Megjhani M(1),
Eliseyev A(1), Connolly ES(1), Rohaut B(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Neurology (J.C., K.D., A.M., C.C., K.M.B., A.V.,
J.U.O., S.P., S.A., D.R., M.M., A.E., B.R.) and Neurosurgery (E.S.C.), Columbia
University, and the Department of Psychology, New York University (J.-R.K.) -
both in New York.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2019 Jun 27;380(26):2575-2576.

BACKGROUND: Brain activation in response to spoken motor commands can be detected
by electroencephalography (EEG) in clinically unresponsive patients. The
prevalence and prognostic importance of a dissociation between commanded motor
behavior and brain activation in the first few days after brain injury are not
well understood.
METHODS: We studied a prospective, consecutive series of patients in a single
intensive care unit who had acute brain injury from a variety of causes and who
were unresponsive to spoken commands, including some patients with the ability to
localize painful stimuli or to fixate on or track visual stimuli. Machine
learning was applied to EEG recordings to detect brain activation in response to 
commands that patients move their hands. The functional outcome at 12 months was 
determined with the Glasgow Outcome Scale-Extended (GOS-E; levels range from 1 to
8, with higher levels indicating better outcomes).
RESULTS: A total of 16 of 104 unresponsive patients (15%) had brain activation
detected by EEG at a median of 4 days after injury. The condition in 8 of these
16 patients (50%) and in 23 of 88 patients (26%) without brain activation
improved such that they were able to follow commands before discharge. At 12
months, 7 of 16 patients (44%) with brain activation and 12 of 84 patients (14%) 
without brain activation had a GOS-E level of 4 or higher, denoting the ability
to function independently for 8 hours (odds ratio, 4.6; 95% confidence interval, 
1.2 to 17.1).
CONCLUSIONS: A dissociation between the absence of behavioral responses to motor 
commands and the evidence of brain activation in response to these commands in
EEG recordings was found in 15% of patients in a consecutive series of patients
with acute brain injury. (Supported by the Dana Foundation and the James S.
McDonnell Foundation.).

Copyright © 2019 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa1812757 
PMID: 31242361  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Clin Med. 2019 Jun 5;8(6). pii: E799. doi: 10.3390/jcm8060799.

Machine Learning Models of Survival Prediction in Trauma Patients.

Rau CS(1), Wu SC(2), Chuang JF(3), Huang CY(4), Liu HT(5), Chien PC(6), Hsieh
CH(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan.
ersh2127@cloud.cgmh.org.tw.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan. shaochunwu@gmail.com.
(3)Department of Trauma Surgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan. jjfce0624@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Trauma Surgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan.
junyinhaung@yahoo.com.tw.
(5)Department of Trauma Surgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan. htl1688@yahoo.com.tw.
(6)Department of Plastic Surgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and
Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan.
VENU_CHIEN@hotmail.com.
(7)Department of Plastic Surgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and
Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung 833, Taiwan.
m93chinghua@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: We aimed to build a model using machine learning for the prediction
of survival in trauma patients and compared these model predictions to those
predicted by the most commonly used algorithm, the Trauma and Injury Severity
Score (TRISS).
METHODS: Enrolled hospitalized trauma patients from 2009 to 2016 were divided
into a training dataset (70% of the original data set) for generation of a
plausible model under supervised classification, and a test dataset (30% of the
original data set) to test the performance of the model. The training and test
datasets comprised 13,208 (12,871 survival and 337 mortality) and 5603 (5473
survival and 130 mortality) patients, respectively. With the provision of
additional information such as pre-existing comorbidity status or laboratory
data, logistic regression (LR), support vector machine (SVM), and neural network 
(NN) (with the Stuttgart Neural Network Simulator (RSNNS)) were used to build
models of survival prediction and compared to the predictive performance of
TRISS. Predictive performance was evaluated by accuracy, sensitivity, and
specificity, as well as by area under the curve (AUC) measures of receiver
operating characteristic curves.
RESULTS: In the validation dataset, NN and the TRISS presented the highest score 
(82.0%) for balanced accuracy, followed by SVM (75.2%) and LR (71.8%) models. In 
the test dataset, NN had the highest balanced accuracy (75.1%), followed by the
TRISS (70.2%), SVM (70.6%), and LR (68.9%) models. All four models (LR, SVM, NN, 
and TRISS) exhibited a high accuracy of more than 97.5% and a sensitivity of more
than 98.6%. However, NN exhibited the highest specificity (51.5%), followed by
the TRISS (41.5%), SVM (40.8%), and LR (38.5%) models.
CONCLUSIONS: These four models (LR, SVM, NN, and TRISS) exhibited a similar high 
accuracy and sensitivity in predicting the survival of the trauma patients. In
the test dataset, the NN model had the highest balanced accuracy and predictive
specificity.

DOI: 10.3390/jcm8060799 
PMCID: PMC6616432
PMID: 31195670 


5. J Rehabil Assist Technol Eng. 2018 Dec 17;5:2055668318808409. doi:
10.1177/2055668318808409. eCollection 2018 Jan-Dec.

Toward community-based wheelchair evaluation with machine learning methods.

Chen PB(1), Morgan K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Occupational Therapy, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO, USA.

Introduction: Upper extremity pain among manual wheelchair users induces
functional decline and reduces quality of life. Research has identified chronic
overuse due to wheelchair propulsion as one of the factors associated with upper 
limb injuries. Lack of a feasible tool to track wheelchair propulsion in the
community precludes testing validity of wheelchair propulsion performed in the
laboratory. Recent studies have shown that wheelchair propulsion can be tracked
through machine learning methods and wearable accelerometers. Better results were
found in subject-specific machine learning method. To further develop this
technique, we conducted a pilot study examining the feasibility of measuring
wheelchair propulsion patterns.
Methods: Two participants, an experienced manual wheelchair user and an
able-bodied individual, wore two accelerometers on their arms. The manual
wheelchair user performed wheelchair propulsion patterns on a wheelchair roller
system and overground. The able-bodied participant performed common daily
activities such as cooking, cleaning, and eating.
Results: The support vector machine built from the wrist and arm acceleration of 
wheelchair propulsion pattern recorded on the wheelchair roller system predicted 
the wheelchair propulsion patterns performed overground with 99.7% accuracy. The 
support vector machine built from additional rotation data recorded overground
predicted wheelchair propulsion patterns (F1 = 0.968).
Conclusions: These results further demonstrate the possibility of tracking
wheelchair propulsion in the community.

DOI: 10.1177/2055668318808409 
PMCID: PMC6531805
PMID: 31191959 

Conflict of interest statement: The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article.


6. J Digit Imaging. 2019 Jun 7. doi: 10.1007/s10278-019-00207-1. [Epub ahead of
print]

Performance of a Deep Learning Algorithm for Automated Segmentation and
Quantification of Traumatic Pelvic Hematomas on CT.

Dreizin D(1), Zhou Y(2), Zhang Y(2), Tirada N(3), Yuille AL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology and Nuclear Medicine & R Adams Cowley Shock
Trauma Center, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.
daviddreizin@gmail.com.
(2)Computational Cognition, Vision, and Learning (CCVL), Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Department of Diagnostic Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, University of
Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

The volume of pelvic hematoma at CT has been shown to be the strongest
independent predictor of major arterial injury requiring angioembolization in
trauma victims with pelvic fractures, and also correlates with transfusion
requirement and mortality. Measurement of pelvic hematomas (unopacified
extraperitoneal blood accumulated from time of injury) using semi-automated
seeded region growing is time-consuming and requires trained experts, precluding 
routine measurement at the point of care. Pelvic hematomas are markedly variable 
in shape and location, have irregular ill-defined margins, have low contrast with
respect to viscera and muscle, and reside within anatomically distorted pelvises.
Furthermore, pelvic hematomas occupy a small proportion of the entire volume of a
chest, abdomen, and pelvis (C/A/P) trauma CT. The challenges are many, and no
automated methods for segmentation and volumetric analysis have been described to
date. Traditional approaches using fully convolutional networks result in coarse 
segmentations and class imbalance with suboptimal convergence. In this study, we 
implement a modified coarse-to-fine deep learning approach-the Recurrent Saliency
Transformation Network (RSTN) for pelvic hematoma volume segmentation. RSTN
previously yielded excellent results in pancreas segmentation, where low contrast
with adjacent structures, small target volume, variable location, and fine
contours are also problematic. We have curated a unique single-institution corpus
of 253 C/A/P admission trauma CT studies in patients with bleeding pelvic
fractures with manually labeled pelvic hematomas. We hypothesized that RSTN would
result in sufficiently high Dice similarity coefficients to facilitate accurate
and objective volumetric measurements for outcome prediction (arterial injury
requiring angioembolization). Cases were separated into five combinations of
training and test sets in an 80/20 split and fivefold cross-validation was
performed. Dice scores in the test set were 0.71 (SD ± 0.10) using RSTN, compared
to 0.49 (SD ± 0.16) using a baseline Deep Learning Tool Kit (DLTK) reference 3D
U-Net architecture. Mean inference segmentation time for RSTN was 0.90 min
(± 0.26). Pearson correlation between predicted and manual labels was 0.95 with
p < 0.0001. Measurement bias was within 10 mL. AUC of hematoma volumes for
predicting need for angioembolization was 0.81 (predicted) versus 0.80 (manual). 
Qualitatively, predicted labels closely followed hematoma contours and avoided
muscle and displaced viscera. Further work will involve validation using a
federated dataset and incorporation into a predictive model using multiple
segmented features.

DOI: 10.1007/s10278-019-00207-1 
PMID: 31172331 


7. Unfallchirurg. 2019 Jun 3. doi: 10.1007/s00113-019-0676-y. [Epub ahead of print]

[Computer-assisted decision-making for trauma patients].

[Article in German]

Osterhoff G(1), Pförringer D(2), Scherer J(3), Juhra C(4), Maerdian S(5), Back
DA(6); Arbeitsgruppe Digitalisierung der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Orthopädie
und Unfallchirurgie.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Orthopädie, Unfallchirurgie und Plastische
Chirurgie, Universitätsklinikum Leipzig, Liebigstr. 20, 04103, Leipzig,
Deutschland. georg.osterhoff@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.
(2)Klinik für Unfallchirurgie, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Ismaninger Straße 22, 81675, München, Deutschland.
(3)Klinik für Traumatologie, UniversitätsSpital Zürich, Rämistraße 100, CH-8091, 
Zürich, Schweiz.
(4)Klinik für Unfall‑, Hand- und Wiederherstellungschirurgie/Stabsstelle
Telemedizin, Universitätsklinikum Münster, Hüfferstraße 73-79, 48149, Münster,
Deutschland.
(5)CMSC - Centrum für Muskuloskeletale Chirurgie, Charité-Universitätsmedizin
Berlin, Augustenburger Platz 1, 13353, Berlin, Deutschland.
(6)Klinik für Unfallchirurgie und Orthopädie, Septische und Rekonstruktive
Chirurgie, Bundeswehrkrankenhaus Berlin, Scharnhorststr 13, 10115, Berlin,
Deutschland.

BACKGROUND: In the management of trauma patients in the resuscitation room many
time-pressured and critical decisions must continuously be made in complex
situations. Even experienced teams frequently make errors in this context.
Computer-assisted decision-making systems can predict critical situations based
on patient data continuously acquired online. Based on the calculated predictions
these systems can suggest the next steps in managing the patient. This review
summarizes the current literature on computer-assisted decision-making in the
management of trauma patients.
OBJECTIVE: A literature review summarizing existing concepts and applications of 
computer-assisted decision-making support for the management of trauma patients.
METHODS: Narrative review article based on an analysis of literature in the
German and English languages from the last 10 years.
RESULTS: There exist numerous computer-assisted decision-making systems in the
field of trauma care. Several studies could show that computer-assisted
decision-making can improve the outcome in the preclinical setting, the
resuscitation room and in the intensive care unit. For further validation and
implementation of these systems, information technological barriers have to be
overcome, existing systems need to be adapted to current data protection
regulations and large multicenter studies are necessary.
CONCLUSION: Computer-assisted decision-making can help to improve the management 
of trauma patients; however, before a ubiquitous implementation a number of
technological and legislative barriers have to be overcome.

DOI: 10.1007/s00113-019-0676-y 
PMID: 31161286 


8. Children (Basel). 2019 May 28;6(6). pii: E72. doi: 10.3390/children6060072.

Digital Attention-Related Augmented-Reality Game: Significant Correlation between
Student Game Performance and Validated Clinical Measures of
Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD).

Keshav NU(1), Vogt-Lowell K(2), Vahabzadeh A(3)(4), Sahin NT(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Power, 1 Broadway, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. neha@brain-power.com.
(2)Brain Power, 1 Broadway, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
kevin.vogt-lowell@brain-power.com.
(3)Brain Power, 1 Broadway, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.
avahabzadeh@mgh.harvard.edu.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114,
USA. avahabzadeh@mgh.harvard.edu.
(5)Brain Power, 1 Broadway, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. sahin@post.harvard.edu.
(6)Department of Psychology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
sahin@post.harvard.edu.

As many as half of school children with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) exhibit
symptoms of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), resulting in marked 
negative academic, social, and behavioral outcomes. The focus of the US Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) on real-world data from novel digital sources, and the 
emergence of Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes to reimburse for digital 
monitoring and neurobehavioral testing suggest an increasing acceptance of the
role of technology in augmenting clinical care and research. Empowered Brain is
an augmented reality and artificial intelligence-based social-emotional
communication aid for students with ASD. In this study, student performance on
Empowered Brain is correlated to validated clinical measures of ADHD. Seven high 
school students with a diagnosis of ASD were recruited from a public high school.
All students were assessed for severity of ADHD-related symptoms via three
clinical gold-standard assessments, namely the Aberrant Behavioral Checklist
(ABC), Social Responsiveness Scale 2 (SRS-2), and Teacher Report Form (TRF).
Students used Empowered Brain over a one-week period. We measured the correlation
of student in-game performance (as measured by point- and star-based rewards)
relative to the hyperactivity subscale of the ABC (ABC-H), and the ADHD-subscale 
of the TRF. All seven students completed the study and managed to successfully
use Empowered Brain. Students received a culminative total of 32 sessions, an
average of 4.6 sessions per student (range 2-8). Student in-game performance
demonstrated highly significant correlation relative to ABC-H (points: p =
0.0013; stars: p = 0.0013)., and significant correlation to TRF ADHD scores
(points: p = 0.012; stars: p = 0.012). No adverse effects were noted among
students who used Empowered Brain. New technologies may herald novel ways of
identifying and characterizing symptoms of ADHD in student populations. This
study provides evidence that Empowered Brain in-game performance correlates with 
ADHD symptom severity in students with ASD. Larger samples are required to
validate these findings, with more diverse participants that can also widen the
generalizability of these findings to a broader range of brain conditions that
manifest with inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity. Through further
research, we may find that such technologies can help us to identify and
longitudinally monitor such symptoms, and potentially aid in severity
stratification and digital phenotyping.

DOI: 10.3390/children6060072 
PMCID: PMC6617061
PMID: 31142022 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors are doctoral level scientists (NUK,
AV, NTS), and lab managers (KV) who hold affiliations at Brain Power. Brain Power
is a congressionally-funded for-profit organization that conducts research and
development of neurotechnologies that can improve the lives of people with brain 
differences and brain injuries. The grant and in-kind funders of the study had no
role in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of
the manuscript, or in the decision to publish the results


9. JAMA Pediatr. 2019 May 13. doi: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2019.1068. [Epub ahead of 
print]

Comparison of Machine Learning Optimal Classification Trees With the Pediatric
Emergency Care Applied Research Network Head Trauma Decision Rules.

Bertsimas D(1), Dunn J(1), Steele DW(2)(3), Trikalinos TA(3), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Operations Research Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge.
(2)Departments of Emergency Medicine and Pediatrics, Alpert Medical School, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island.
(3)Center for Evidence Synthesis in Health, Brown University School of Public
Health, Providence, Rhode Island.

Importance: Computed tomographic (CT) scanning is the standard for the rapid
diagnosis of intracranial injury, but it is costly and exposes patients to
ionizing radiation. The Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network
(PECARN) rules for identifying children with minor head trauma who are at very
low risk of clinically important traumatic brain injury (ciTBI) are widely used
to triage CT imaging.
Objective: To examine whether optimal classification trees (OCTs), which are
novel machine-learning classifiers, improve on PECARN rules' predictive accuracy.
Design, Setting, and Participants: A secondary analysis of prospective, publicly 
available data on emergency department visits for head trauma used by the PECARN 
group to develop their tool was conducted to derive OCT-based prediction rules
for ciTBI in a development cohort and compare their predictive performance vs the
PECARN rules in a validation cohort among children who were younger than 2 years 
and 2 years or older. Data on 42 412 children with head trauma and without
severely altered mental status who were examined between June 1, 2004, and
September 30, 2006, were gathered from 25 emergency departments in North America 
participating in PECARN. Data analysis was conducted from September 15, 2016, to 
December 18, 2018.
Main Outcomes and Measures: The outcome was ciTBI, with predictive performance
measured by estimating the sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value,
negative predictive value, positive likelihood ratio, and negative likelihood
ratio for the OCT and the PECARN rules. The OCT and PECARN rules' performance was
compared by estimating ratios for each measure.
Results: Of the 42 412 children (15 996 [37.7%] girls) included in the analysis, 
10 718 were younger than 2 years (25.3%; mean [SD] age, 11.6 [0.6] months) and
31 694 were 2 years or older (74.7%; age, 9.1 [4.9] years). Compared with PECARN 
rules, OCTs misclassified 0 vs 1 child with ciTBI in the younger and 10 vs 9
children with ciTBI in the older cohort, and correctly identified more children
with very low risk of ciTBI in the younger (7605 vs 5701) and older (20 594 vs 18
134) cohorts. In the validation cohorts, compared with the PECARN rules, the OCTs
had statistically significantly better specificity (in the younger cohort: 69.3%;
95% CI, 67.4%-71.2% vs 52.8%; 95% CI, 50.8%-54.9%; in the older cohort: 65.6%;
95% CI, 64.5%-66.8% vs 57.6%; 95% CI, 56.4%-58.8%), positive predictive value
(odds ratios, 1.54; 95% CI, 1.36-1.74 and 1.23; 95% CI, 1.17-1.30, in younger and
older children, respectively), and positive likelihood ratio (risk ratios, 1.54; 
95% CI, 1.36-1.74 and 1.23; 95% CI, 1.17-1.30, in younger and older children,
respectively). There were no statistically significant differences in the
sensitivity, negative predictive value, and negative likelihood ratio between the
2 sets of rules.
Conclusions and Relevance: If implemented, OCTs may help reduce the number of
unnecessary CT scans, without missing more patients with ciTBI than the PECARN
rules.

DOI: 10.1001/jamapediatrics.2019.1068 
PMCID: PMC6515573 [Available on 2020-05-13]
PMID: 31081856 


10. J Neurosurg. 2019 May 10:1-9. doi: 10.3171/2019.2.JNS182098. [Epub ahead of
print]

A traumatic brain injury prognostic model to support in-hospital triage in a
low-income country: a machine learning-based approach.

Hernandes Rocha TA(1), Elahi C(1)(2), Cristina da Silva N(2), Sakita FM(3),
Fuller A(1)(2)(4), Mmbaga BT(2)(3)(5), Green EP(2), Haglund MM(1)(2)(4), Staton
CA(1)(2)(6), Nickenig Vissoci JR(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1Duke Division of Global Neurosurgery and Neurology.
(2)2Duke University Global Health Institute, Durham, North Carolina.
(3)3Kilimanjaro Christian Medical Centre, Moshi, Tanzania.
(4)4Department of Neurosurgery, Duke University Medical Center.
(5)5Kilimanjaro Clinical Research Institute, Moshi, Tanzania.
(6)6Division of Emergency Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina; and.

OBJECTIVETraumatic brain injury (TBI) is a leading cause of death and disability 
worldwide, with a disproportionate burden of this injury on low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs). Limited access to diagnostic technologies and
highly skilled providers combined with high patient volumes contributes to poor
outcomes in LMICs. Prognostic modeling as a clinical decision support tool, in
theory, could optimize the use of existing resources and support timely treatment
decisions in LMICs. The objective of this study was to develop a machine
learning-based prognostic model using data from Kilimanjaro Christian Medical
Centre in Moshi, Tanzania.METHODSThis study is a secondary analysis of a TBI data
registry including 3138 patients. The authors tested nine different machine
learning techniques to identify the prognostic model with the greatest area under
the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC). Input data included
demographics, vital signs, injury type, and treatment received. The outcome
variable was the discharge score on the Glasgow Outcome Scale-Extended.RESULTSThe
AUC for the prognostic models varied from 66.2% (k-nearest neighbors) to 86.5%
(Bayesian generalized linear model). An increasing Glasgow Coma Scale score,
increasing pulse oximetry values, and undergoing TBI surgery were predictive of a
good recovery, while injuries suffered from a motor vehicle crash and increasing 
age were predictive of a poor recovery.CONCLUSIONSThe authors developed a TBI
prognostic model with a substantial level of accuracy in a low-resource setting. 
Further research is needed to externally validate the model and test the
algorithm as a clinical decision support tool.

DOI: 10.3171/2019.2.JNS182098 
PMID: 31075779 


11. Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging. 2019 Mar 13. pii:
S2451-9022(19)30067-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bpsc.2019.03.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Machine Learning Analysis of the Relationships Between Gray Matter Volume and
Childhood Trauma in a Transdiagnostic Community-Based Sample.

Clausen AN(1), Aupperle RL(2), Yeh HW(3), Waller D(4), Payne J(3), Kuplicki R(3),
Akeman E(3), Paulus M(2); Tulsa 1000 Investigators.

Collaborators: Bodurka J, Simmons K, Feinstein J, Savitz J, Cha YH, Khalsa SS,
Victor T.

Author information: 
(1)Laureate Institute for Brain Research, Tulsa; VA Mid-Atlantic Mental Illness
Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Durham VA Healthcare System, Durham,
North Carolina; Duke Brain Imaging and Analysis Center, Duke Medical University, 
Durham, North Carolina. Electronic address: ashley.clausen@duke.edu.
(2)Laureate Institute for Brain Research, Tulsa; Department of Community
Medicine, University of Tulsa, Tulsa; Stephenson School of Biomedical
Engineering, University of Oklahoma, Norman, Oklahoma.
(3)Laureate Institute for Brain Research, Tulsa.
(4)Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.

BACKGROUND: Childhood trauma is a significant risk factor for adult
psychopathology. Previous investigations have implicated childhood trauma-related
structural changes in anterior cingulate, dorsolateral prefrontal and
orbitofrontal cortex, and hippocampus. Using a large transdiagnostic community
sample, the goal of this investigation was to differentially associate regional
gray matter (GM) volume with childhood trauma severity specifically, distinct
from adult psychopathology.
METHODS: A total of 577 non-treatment-seeking adults (n = 207 men) completed
diagnostic, childhood trauma, and structural magnetic resonance imaging
assessments with regional GM volume estimated using FreeSurfer. Elastic net
analysis was conducted in a nested cross-validation framework, with GM volumes,
adult psychopathology, age, education, sex, and magnetic resonance imaging coil
type as potential predictors for childhood trauma severity.
RESULTS: Elastic net identified age, education, sex, medical condition, adult
psychopathology, and 13 GM regions as predictors of childhood trauma severity. GM
regions identified included right caudate; left pallidum; bilateral insula and
cingulate sulcus; left superior, inferior, and orbital frontal regions; and
regions within temporal and parietal lobes and cerebellum.
CONCLUSIONS: Results from this large, transdiagnostic sample implicate GM volume 
in regions central to current neurobiological theories of trauma (e.g.,
prefrontal cortex) as well as additional regions involved in reward,
interoceptive, attentional, and sensory processing (e.g., striatal, insula, and
parietal/occipital cortices). Future longitudinal studies examining the
functional impact of structural changes in this broader network of regions are
needed to clarify the role each may play in longer-term outcomes following
trauma.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bpsc.2019.03.001 
PMID: 31053534 


12. Accid Anal Prev. 2019 Jul;128:65-77. doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2019.04.002. Epub 2019
Apr 10.

A Comprehensive Railroad-Highway Grade Crossing Consolidation Model: A Machine
Learning Approach.

Soleimani S(1), Mousa SR(2), Codjoe J(3), Leitner M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Geography & Anthropology Department, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, 
LA 70802, United States. Electronic address: ssolei1@lsu.edu.
(2)Civil & Environmental Engineeing Department, Louisiana State University, LA
70808, United States.
(3)Louisiana Transportation Research Center, Louisiana State University, LA
70808, United States.
(4)Geography & Anthropology Department, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, 
LA 70802, United States.

In the United States, there are approximately 212,000 highway-rail grade
crossings, some of which experience vehicle-train incidents that often cause a
massive financial burden, loss of life, and injury. In 2017, there were 2,108
highway-rail incidents resulting in 827 injuries and 307 fatalities nationwide.
To eliminate collision risks, crossing grade separation and active alarm
improvement are commonly used. Moreover, crossing closures are considered to be
the most effective safety improvement program. While it may be very difficult,
and in some cases impossible to close crossings, there are some incentive
programs that facilitate the closure process. One of these programs is a working 
consolidation model that aims to determine crossing closure suitability. Using
details of highway-rail grade crossings in the United States and applying an
eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XGboost) algorithm, this paper proposes a data-driven 
consolidation model that takes into consideration a number of engineering
variables. The results indicated an overall accuracy of 0.991 for the proposed
model. In addition, the developed XGboost consolidation model reported the
relative importance of the variables input to the model, offering an in-depth
understanding of the model's behavior. Finally, for the practical implementation 
of the model, a simplified version containing fewer variables was developed. A
sensitivity analysis was performed considering the aggregate gain and the
different correlation threshold values between variables. This analysis developed
a simplified model utilizing 14 variables, with aggregated gain values of 75% and
a correlation threshold of 0.9 which would perform similarly to the full model.
Based on this model, 62% of current highway-rail grade crossings should be
closed.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2019.04.002 
PMID: 30980987  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2019 Apr 10;14(4):e0213836. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0213836.
eCollection 2019.

Dynamic multi-outcome prediction after injury: Applying adaptive machine learning
for precision medicine in trauma.

Christie SA(1), Conroy AS(1), Callcut RA(1), Hubbard AE(2), Cohen MJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital and Trauma
Center and the University of California, San Francisco; San Francisco,
California, United States of America.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, University of California, Berkeley School of
Public Health; Berkeley, California, United States of America.
(3)Denver Health Medical Center and the University of Colorado; Denver, Colorado,
United States of America.

OBJECTIVE: Machine learning techniques have demonstrated superior discrimination 
compared to conventional statistical approaches in predicting trauma death. The
objective of this study is to evaluate whether machine learning algorithms can be
used to assess risk and dynamically identify patient-specific modifiable factors 
critical to patient trajectory for multiple key outcomes after severe injury.
METHODS: SuperLearner, an ensemble machine-learning algorithm, was applied to
prospective observational cohort data from 1494 critically-injured patients. Over
1000 agnostic predictors were used to generate prediction models from multiple
candidate learners for outcomes of interest at serial time points post-injury.
Model accuracy was estimated using cross-validation and area under the curve was 
compared to select among predictors. Clinical variables responsible for driving
outcomes were estimated at each time point.
RESULTS: SuperLearner fits demonstrated excellent cross-validated prediction of
death (overall AUC 0.94-0.97), multi-organ failure (overall AUC 0.84-0.90), and
transfusion (overall AUC 0.87-0.9) across multiple post-injury time points, and
good prediction of Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome (overall AUC 0.84-0.89)
and venous thromboembolism (overall AUC 0.73-0.83). Outcomes with inferior data
quality included coagulopathic trajectory (AUC 0.48-0.88). Key clinical
predictors evolved over the post-injury timecourse and included both anticipated 
and unexpected variables. Non-random missingness of data was identified as a
predictor of multiple outcomes over time.
CONCLUSIONS: Machine learning algorithms can be used to generate dynamic
prediction after injury while avoiding the risk of over- and under-fitting
inherent in ad hoc statistical approaches. SuperLearner prediction after injury
demonstrates promise as an adaptable means of helping clinicians integrate
voluminous, evolving data on severely-injured patients into real-time, dynamic
decision-making support.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0213836 
PMCID: PMC6457612
PMID: 30970030 

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


14. Comput Biol Med. 2019 May;108:9-19. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2019.02.025. Epub
2019 Mar 6.

The trauma severity model: An ensemble machine learning approach to risk
prediction.

Gorczyca MT(1), Toscano NC(2), Cheng JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Engineering, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA. Electronic address: mtg62@cornell.edu.
(2)Department of Surgery, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, NY, 
14642, USA.

Statistical theory indicates that a flexible model can attain a lower
generalization error than an inflexible model, provided that the setting is
appropriate. This is highly relevant for mortality risk prediction with trauma
patients, as researchers have focused exclusively on the use of generalized
linear models for trauma risk prediction, and generalized linear models may be
too inflexible to capture the potentially complex relationships in trauma data.
To improve trauma risk prediction, we propose a machine learning model, the
Trauma Severity Model (TSM). In order to validate TSM's performance, this study
compares TSM to three established risk prediction models: the Bayesian Logistic
Injury Severity Score, the Harborview Assessment for Risk of Mortality, and the
Trauma Mortality Prediction Model. Our results indicate that TSM has superior
predictive performance on National Trauma Data Bank data and on Nationwide
Readmission Database data.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2019.02.025 
PMID: 30965177 


15. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2019 Apr 5:1-10. doi: 10.3171/2019.1.PEDS18293. [Epub ahead 
of print]

Selection of children with ultra-severe traumatic brain injury for neurosurgical 
intervention.

Greenan K(1)(2), Taylor SL(3), Fulkerson D(4), Shahlaie K(1), Gerndt C(1),
Krueger EM(2), Zwienenberg M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, Davis.
(2)Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery, University of Colorado, Aurora,
Colorado; and
(3)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, School of
Medicine, University of California, Davis, Sacramento, California.
(4)Department of Neurological Surgery, Goodman Campbell Brain and Spine, Riley
Hospital for Children, Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana.

Objective: A recent retrospective study of severe traumatic brain injury (TBI) in
pediatric patients showed similar outcomes in those with a Glasgow Coma Scale
(GCS) score of 3 and those with a score of 4 and reported a favorable long-term
outcome in 11.9% of patients. Using decision tree analysis, authors of that study
provided criteria to identify patients with a potentially favorable outcome. The 
authors of the present study sought to validate the previously described decision
tree and further inform understanding of the outcomes of children with a GCS
score 3 or 4 by using data from multiple institutions and machine learning
methods to identify important predictors of outcome.
Methods: Clinical, radiographic, and outcome data on pediatric TBI patients (age 
< 18 years) were prospectively collected as part of an institutional TBI
registry. Patients with a GCS score of 3 or 4 were selected, and the previously
published prediction model was evaluated using this data set. Next, a combined
data set that included data from two institutions was used to create a new, more 
statistically robust model using binomial recursive partitioning to create a
decision tree.
Results: Forty-five patients from the institutional TBI registry were included in
the present study, as were 67 patients from the previously published data set,
for a total of 112 patients in the combined analysis. The previously published
prediction model for survival was externally validated and performed only
modestly (AUC 0.68, 95% CI 0.47, 0.89). In the combined data set, pupillary
response and age were the only predictors retained in the decision tree.
Ninety-six percent of patients with bilaterally nonreactive pupils had a poor
outcome. If the pupillary response was normal in at least one eye, the outcome
subsequently depended on age: 72% of children between 5 months and 6 years old
had a favorable outcome, whereas 100% of children younger than 5 months old and
77% of those older than 6 years had poor outcomes. The overall accuracy of the
combined prediction model was 90.2% with a sensitivity of 68.4% and specificity
of 93.6%.
Conclusions: A previously published survival model for severe TBI in children
with a low GCS score was externally validated. With a larger data set, however, a
simplified and more robust model was developed, and the variables most predictive
of outcome were age and pupillary response.
Abbreviations: AUC = area under the curve; ER = Emergency Room; GCS = Glasgow
Coma Scale; GOS = Glasgow Outcome Scale; GOS-E = Extended GOS; ICP = intracranial
pressure; MVA = motor vehicle accident; NAT = nonaccidental trauma; RH = Riley
Hospital; TBI = traumatic brain injury; tSAH = traumatic subarachnoid hemorrhage;
UCD = UC Davis.

DOI: 10.3171/2019.1.PEDS18293 
PMID: 30952132 


16. J Trauma Stress. 2019 Apr;32(2):215-225. doi: 10.1002/jts.22384. Epub 2019 Mar
20.

Machine Learning for Prediction of Posttraumatic Stress and Resilience Following 
Trauma: An Overview of Basic Concepts and Recent Advances.

Schultebraucks K(1), Galatzer-Levy IR(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, New York University School of Medicine, New York,
NY, USA.
(2)AiCure, New York, NY, USA.

Posttraumatic stress responses are characterized by a heterogeneity in clinical
appearance and etiology. This heterogeneity impacts the field's ability to
characterize, predict, and remediate maladaptive responses to trauma. Machine
learning (ML) approaches are increasingly utilized to overcome this foundational 
problem in characterization, prediction, and treatment selection across branches 
of medicine that have struggled with similar clinical realities of heterogeneity 
in etiology and outcome, such as oncology. In this article, we review and
evaluate ML approaches and applications utilized in the areas of posttraumatic
stress, stress pathology, and resilience research, and present didactic
information and examples to aid researchers interested in the relevance of ML to 
their own research. The examined studies exemplify the high potential of ML
approaches to build accurate predictive and diagnostic models of posttraumatic
stress and stress pathology risk based on diverse sources of available
information. The use of ML approaches to integrate high-dimensional data
demonstrates substantial gains in risk prediction even when the sources of data
are the same as those used in traditional predictive models. This area of
research will greatly benefit from collaboration and data sharing among
researchers of posttraumatic stress disorder, stress pathology, and resilience.

Publisher: Spanish Abstracts by Asociación Chilena de Estrés Traumático (ACET)
Aprendizaje de Máquinas para la Predicción del Estrés Postraumático y Resiliencia
después del Trauma: Una Visión General de los Conceptos Básicos y Avances
Recientes APRENDIZAJE DE MAQUINAS Y ESTRÉS POSTRAUMÁTICO Las respuestas al estrés
postraumático se caracterizan por una heterogeneidad en el aspecto clínico y
etiología. Esta heterogeneidad afecta la capacidad del campo para caracterizar,
predecir y remediar respuestas desadaptativas al trauma. Los enfoques de
aprendizaje maquinas (AM) son cada vez más utilizados para superar este problema 
fundamental en la caracterización, predicción y selección de tratamiento a través
de las ramas de la medicina que han luchado con realidades clínicas similares de 
heterogeneidad en la etiología y resultados, como la oncología. En este artículo,
revisamos y evaluamos los enfoques y las aplicaciones de AM utilizados en las
áreas de estrés postraumático, patología del estrés, e investigación en
resiliencia y presenta información didáctica y ejemplos para ayudar a
investigadores interesados ​​en la relevancia del AM para su propia
investigación. Los estudios examinados ejemplifican el alto potencial de los
enfoques de AM para construir modelos predictivos y de diagnóstico precisos de
estrés postraumático y riesgo de estrés patológico basados ​​en diversas fuentes 
de Información disponible. El uso de enfoques de AM para integrar datos
multidimensionales demuestran ganancias sustanciales en la predicción del riesgo,
incluso cuando las fuentes de datos son las mismas que las utilizadas en los
modelos predictivos tradicionales. Esta área de investigación se beneficiará
enormemente de la colaboración y el intercambio de datos entre los investigadores
del trastorno de estrés postraumático, la patología del estrés y
resiliencia.Publisher: Traditional and Simplified Chinese Abstracts by the Asian 
Society for Traumatic Stress Studies (AsianSTSS) 簡體及繁體中文撮要由亞洲創傷心理研究學會翻譯 Machine
Learning for Prediction of Posttraumatic Stress and Resilience following Trauma: 
An Overview of Basic Concepts and Recent Advances Traditional Chinese 標題:
以機器學習法來預測個人受創後的創傷後壓力和恢復力:對基本概念和近期發展的回顧 撮要:
創傷後壓力反應可根據臨床表現和病原學的異質性來找出。這種異質性會影響業界對創傷後適應不良反應的特徵定義、預測和治療。在病原學和治療情況面對相似的臨床異質性的各種醫
科, 如腫瘤學,
越來越多人採用機器學習法(ML)來解決特徵定義、預測和治療選擇的根本問題。本研究檢視和評核覆蓋創傷後壓力、壓力病理學和恢復力的研究中ML的方法和應用,
以及為有興趣使用ML的研究員提供教學資訊和例子。檢視的研究都展示了ML有很大機會可基於多元的資訊來源,
就創傷後壓力和壓力病理學風險建立準確的預測和診斷模型。即使數據來源與傳統預測模型所使用的一樣,
以ML來綜合高因次的數據在風險預測方面有顯著功效。研究創傷後壓力症、壓力病理學和恢復力的研究員如果合作並分享數據, 將大大有助這類研究發展。 Simplified
Chinese 标题: 以机器学习法来预测个人受创后的创伤后压力和恢复力:对基本概念和近期发展的回顾 撮要:
创伤后压力反应可根据临床表现和病原学的异质性来找出。这种异质性会影响业界对创伤后适应不良反应的特征定义、预测和治疗。在病原学和治疗情况面对相似的临床异质性的各种医
科, 如肿瘤学,
越来越多人采用机器学习法(ML)来解决特征定义、预测和治疗选择的根本问题。本研究检视和评核覆盖创伤后压力、压力病理学和恢复力的研究中ML的方法和应用,
以及为有兴趣使用ML的研究员提供教学信息和例子。检视的研究都展示了ML有很大机会可基于多元的信息来源,
就创伤后压力和压力病理学风险建立准确的预测和诊断模型。即使数据来源与传统预测模型所使用的一样,
以ML来综合高因次的数据在风险预测方面有显著功效。研究创伤后压力症、压力病理学和恢复力的研究员如果合作并分享数据, 将大大有助这类研究发展。.
© 2019 International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies.

DOI: 10.1002/jts.22384 
PMID: 30892723 


17. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2019 Aug;51(8):1619-1625. doi:
10.1249/MSS.0000000000001974.

Shared Neuromuscular Performance Traits in Military Personnel with Prior
Concussion.

Eagle SR(1), Kontos AP(2), Mi QI(1), Flanagan SD(1), Nindl BC(1), Beals K(1),
Connaboy C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Neuromuscular Research Laboratory/Warrior Human Performance Research Center,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
(2)UPMC Sports Medicine Concussion Program/Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.

Concussions are common in military personnel and may result in increased risk of 
musculoskeletal injury. One plausible explanation for this risk could be that
neuromotor deficiencies enhance injury risk after a concussion through altered
muscular activation/contraction timing.PURPOSE: To compare military personnel
with at least one concussion during the past 1 month to 2 yr (CONCUSSED) to
military branch-matched, age-matched, and Special Operations Forces group-matched
controls (CONTROL) on physiological, musculoskeletal, and biomechanical
performance.
METHODS: A total of 48 (24 CONCUSSED, 24 CONTROL) male Air Force and Naval
Special Warfare Operators age 19 to 34 yr participated in the study. Participants
self-reported demographics/injury history and completed the following
assessments: 1) physiological-body composition, anaerobic power and capacity,
aerobic capacity and lactate threshold; 2) musculoskeletal-lower extremity
isokinetic strength testing, including time to peak torque; and 3)
biomechanical-single-leg jump and landing task, including landing kinematics of
the hip, knee and ankle. A machine learning decision tree algorithm (C5.0) and
one-way ANOVA were used to compare the two groups on these outcomes.
RESULTS: Despite nonsignificant differences using ANOVA, the C5.0 algorithm
revealed CONCUSSED demonstrated quicker time to peak knee flexion angle during
the single-leg landing task (≤0.170 s; CONCUSSED: n = 22 vs CONTROL: n = 14),
longer time to peak torque in knee extension isokinetic strength testing (>500
ms; CONCUSSED: n = 18 vs CONTROL: n = 4) and larger knee flexion angle at initial
contact (>7.7°; CONCUSSED: n = 18 vs CONTROL: n = 2).
CONCLUSION: The findings supported the hypothesis that CONCUSSED military
personnel would demonstrate altered neuromuscular control in landing strategies
and muscular activation. Future research should assess prospectively
neuromuscular changes after a concussion and determine if these changes increase 
risk of subsequent musculoskeletal injuries.

DOI: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000001974 
PMID: 30845049 


18. J Foot Ankle Surg. 2019 May;58(3):410-416. doi: 10.1053/j.jfas.2018.09.004. Epub 
2019 Feb 23.

Machine Learning Accurately Predicts Short-Term Outcomes Following Open Reduction
and Internal Fixation of Ankle Fractures.

Merrill RK(1), Ferrandino RM(2), Hoffman R(3), Shaffer GW(4), Ndu A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Orthopedic Surgery Resident, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Albert Einstein
Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA. Electronic address: merrillr@einstein.edu.
(2)Ear Nose and Throat Resident, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New
York, NY.
(3)Orthopedic Surgery Resident, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Albert Einstein
Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA.
(4)Orthopedic Surgeon, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Albert Einstein Medical 
Center, Philadelphia, PA.

Ankle fractures are common orthopedic injuries with favorable outcomes when
managed with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF). Several patient-related
risk factors may contribute to poor short-term outcomes, and machine learning may
be a valuable tool for predicting outcomes. The objective of this study was to
evaluate machine-learning algorithms for accurately predicting short-term
outcomes after ORIF for ankle fractures. The Nationwide Inpatient Sample and
Nationwide Readmissions Database were queried for adult patients ≥18 years old
who underwent ORIF of an ankle fracture during 2013 or 2014. Morbidity and
mortality, length of stay >3 days, and 30-day all-cause readmission were the
outcomes of interest. Two machine-learning models were created to identify
patient and hospital characteristics associated with the 3 outcomes. The machine 
learning models were evaluated using confusion matrices and receiver operating
characteristic area under the curve values. A total of 16,501 cases were drawn
from the Nationwide Inpatient Sample and used to assess morbidity and mortality
and length of stay >3 days, and 33,504 cases were drawn from the Nationwide
Readmissions Database to assess 30-day readmission. Older age, Medicaid,
Medicare, deficiency anemia, congestive heart failure, chronic lung disease,
diabetes, hypertension, and renal failure were the variables associated with a
statistically significant increased risk of developing all 3 adverse events.
Logistic regression and gradient boosting had similar area under the curve values
for each outcome, but gradient boosting was more accurate and more specific for
predicting each outcome. Our results suggest that several comorbidities may be
associated with adverse short-term outcomes after ORIF of ankle fractures, and
that machine learning can accurately predict these outcomes.

Copyright © 2018 the American College of Foot and Ankle Surgeons. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1053/j.jfas.2018.09.004 
PMID: 30803914 


19. PLoS One. 2019 Feb 22;14(2):e0212488. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212488.
eCollection 2019.

Using natural language processing and machine learning to classify health
literacy from secure messages: The ECLIPPSE study.

Balyan R(1), Crossley SA(2), Brown W 3rd(3), Karter AJ(4), McNamara DS(5), Liu
JY(4), Lyles CR(3)(4)(6), Schillinger D(3)(4)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Ira A. Fulton School of Engineering, Arizona State University, Mesa, Arizona, 
United States of America.
(2)Department of Applied Linguistics/ESL, College of Arts and Sciences, Georgia
State University, Atlanta, GA, United States of America.
(3)UCSF Center for Vulnerable Populations, Department of Medicine, University of 
California, San Francisco, California, United States of America.
(4)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, Oakland,
California, United States of America.
(5)Psychology Department, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States
of America.
(6)Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital and Trauma Center, San Francisco,
California, United States of America.

Limited health literacy is a barrier to optimal healthcare delivery and outcomes.
Current measures requiring patients to self-report limitations are time-consuming
and may be considered intrusive by some. This makes widespread classification of 
patient health literacy challenging. The objective of this study was to develop
and validate "literacy profiles" as automated indicators of patients' health
literacy to facilitate a non-intrusive, economic and more comprehensive
characterization of health literacy among a health care delivery system's
membership. To this end, three literacy profiles were generated based on natural 
language processing (combining computational linguistics and machine learning)
using a sample of 283,216 secure messages sent from 6,941 patients to their
primary care physicians. All patients were participants in Kaiser Permanente
Northern California's DISTANCE Study. Performance of the three literacy profiles 
were compared against a gold standard of patient self-reported health literacy.
Associations were analyzed between each literacy profile and patient
demographics, health outcomes and healthcare utilization. T-tests were used for
numeric data such as A1C, Charlson comorbidity index and healthcare utilization
rates, and chi-square tests for categorical data such as sex, race, poor
adherence and severe hypoglycemia. Literacy profiles varied in their test
characteristics, with C-statistics ranging from 0.61-0.74. Relations between
literacy profiles and health outcomes revealed patterns consistent with previous 
health literacy research: patients identified via literacy profiles indicative of
limited health literacy: (a) were older and more likely of minority status; (b)
had poorer medication adherence and glycemic control; and (c) exhibited higher
rates of hypoglycemia, comorbidities and healthcare utilization. This represents 
the first successful attempt to employ natural language processing to estimate
health literacy. Literacy profiles can offer an automated and economical way to
identify patients with limited health literacy and greater vulnerability to poor 
health outcomes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0212488 
PMCID: PMC6386302
PMID: 30794616 

Conflict of interest statement: We have the following interests: Andrew J. Karter
and Jennifer Y. Liu are employed by the non-profit health system, Kaiser
Permanente Northern California (KPNC). No funding from the KPNC was used to
underwrite the research, although KPNC members (patients) may benefit from this
research if it employs the Literacy Profiles developed through this research.
While Courtney R. Lyles and Dean Schillinger are Adjunct Faculty of the Kaiser
Permanente Northern California Division of Research, they are employed by the
University of California San Francisco and receive no funds from KPNC. Danielle
S. McNamara owns a company Adaptive Literacy Technologies LLC. However, no
funding from the company was used to underwrite the research and the company will
not benefit from this research. There are no patents, products in development or 
marketed products to declare. These competing interests do not alter our
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


20. J Orthop Trauma. 2019 Jul;33(7):324-330. doi: 10.1097/BOT.0000000000001454.

Bundled Care for Hip Fractures: A Machine-Learning Approach to an Untenable
Patient-Specific Payment Model.

Karnuta JM(1), Navarro SM(2), Haeberle HS(3), Billow DG(1), Krebs VE(1), Ramkumar
PN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.
(2)Said Business School, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX.

OBJECTIVES: With the transition to a value-based model of care delivery, bundled 
payment models have been implemented with demonstrated success in elective lower 
extremity joint arthroplasty. Yet, hip fracture outcomes are dependent on
patient-level factors that may not be optimized preoperatively due to acuity of
care. The objectives of this study are to (1) develop a supervised naive Bayes
machine-learning algorithm using preoperative patient data to predict length of
stay and cost after hip fracture and (2) propose a patient-specific payment model
to project reimbursements based on patient comorbidities.
METHODS: Using the New York Statewide Planning and Research Cooperative System
database, we studied 98,562 Medicare patients who underwent operative management 
for hip fracture from 2009 to 2016. A naive Bayes machine-learning model was
built using age, sex, ethnicity, race, type of admission, risk of mortality, and 
severity of illness as predictive inputs.
RESULTS: Accuracy was demonstrated at 76.5% and 79.0% for length of stay and
cost, respectively. Performance was 88% for length of stay and 89% for cost.
Model error analysis showed increasing model error with increasing risk of
mortality, which thus increased the risk-adjusted payment for each risk of
mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Our naive Bayes machine-learning algorithm provided excellent
accuracy and responsiveness in the prediction of length of stay and cost of an
episode of care for hip fracture using preoperative variables. This model
demonstrates that the cost of delivery of hip fracture care is dependent on
largely nonmodifiable patient-specific factors, likely making bundled care an
implausible payment model for hip fractures.

DOI: 10.1097/BOT.0000000000001454 
PMID: 30730360 


21. Epilepsy Res. 2019 Feb;150:17-26. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2018.12.010. Epub
2018 Dec 27.

Informatics tools to assess the success of procedural harmonization in
preclinical multicenter biomarker discovery study on post-traumatic
epileptogenesis.

Ciszek R(1), Ndode-Ekane XE(2), Gomez CS(3), Casillas-Espinosa PM(4), Ali I(4),
Smith G(3), Puhakka N(2), Lapinlampi N(2), Andrade P(2), Kamnaksh A(5), Immonen
R(2), Paananen T(2), Hudson MR(4), Brady RD(4), Shultz SR(6), O'Brien TJ(7),
Staba RJ(3), Tohka J(2), Pitkänen A(2).

Author information: 
(1)A.I. Virtanen Institute for Molecular Sciences, University of Eastern Finland,
Kuopio, Finland. Electronic address: ciszek@uef.fi.
(2)A.I. Virtanen Institute for Molecular Sciences, University of Eastern Finland,
Kuopio, Finland.
(3)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles,
CA, USA.
(4)The Department of Neuroscience, Central Clinical School, Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia; Department of Medicine, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, The
University of Melbourne, Victoria, 3052, Australia.
(5)Department of Anatomy, Physiology and Genetics, Uniformed Services University,
MD, USA.
(6)The Department of Neuroscience, Central Clinical School, Monash University,
Melbourne, Australia.
(7)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles,
CA, USA; Department of Medicine, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, The University of 
Melbourne, Victoria, 3052, Australia; Department of Neurology, The Alfred
Hospital, Commercial Road, Melbourne, Victoria, 3004, Australia; Department of
Neurology, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Grattan Street, Parkville, Victoria,
3050, Australia.

The Epilepsy Bioinformatics Study for Antiepileptogenic Therapy (EpiBioS4Rx) is a
National Institutes for Neurological Diseases and Stoke funded
Centers-Without-Walls international multidisciplinary study aimed at preventing
epileptogenesis. The preclinical biomarker discovery in EpiBios4Rx applies a
multicenter study design to allow the number of animals that are required for
adequate statistical power for the analysis to be studied in an efficient manner.
Further, the use of multiple centers mimics the clinical trial situation, and
therefore potentially the chance of successful clinical translation of the
outcomes of the study. Its successful implementation requires harmonization of
procedures and data analyses between the three contributing centers in Finland,
Australia, and USA. The objective of the present analysis was to develop metrics 
for analysis of the success of harmonization of procedures to guide further data 
analyses and plan the future multicenter preclinical studies. The interim
analysis of data is based on the analysis of data from 212 rats with lateral
fluid-percussion injury or sham-operation included in the biomarker discovery by 
April 30, 2018. The details of protocols, including production of injury,
post-injury follow-up, blood sampling, electroencephalogram recording, and
magnetic resonance imaging have been presented in the accompanying manuscripts in
this Supplement. Implementation of protocols in EpiBios4Rx project participant
centers was visualized in 2D using t-distributed stochastic neighborhood
embedding (t-SNE). The protocols applied to each rat were presented as feature
vectors of procedure related variables (e.g., impact pressure, anesthesia time). 
The total number of protocol features linked to each rat was 112. The missing
data was accounted in visualization by utilizing imputation and adding the number
of missing values as a third dimension to 2D t-SNE plot, resulting in a 3D
overview of protocol data. Intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC) using
Euclidean distances and area under receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) 
of k-nearest neighbor classifier (KNN) were utilized to quantify the degree of
clustering by center. Both subsets of data with incomplete protocol vectors
omitted and missing protocol data imputed were assessed. Our data show that a
visible clustering by center was observed in all t-SNE plots, except for day 7
neuroscores. Both ICC and AUC indicated clustering by center in all protocol
variable subsets, excluding unimputed day 7 neuroscores (ICC 0.04 and AUC 0.6).
ICC for imputed set of all protocol related variables was 0.1 and KNN AUC 0.92.
In conclusion, both ICC and AUC indicated differences in protocol between
EpiBios4Rx participating centers, which needs to be taken into account in data
analysis. Importantly, the majority of observed differences are recoverable as
they relate to insufficient updates in record keeping. While AUC score of KNN is 
a more sensitive measure for protocol harmonization than ICC for data that
displays complex splintered clustering, ICC and AUC provide complementary
measures to assess the degree of procedural harmonization. This experience should
be helpful for other groups planning such multicenter post-traumatic
epileptogenesis studies in the future.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2018.12.010 
PMID: 30605864  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Traffic Inj Prev. 2018;19(sup2):S121-S126. doi: 10.1080/15389588.2018.1519805.
Epub 2018 Dec 20.

Novel learning framework (knockoff technique) to evaluate metric ranking
algorithms to describe human response to injury.

Banerjee A(1), DeVogel N(1), Pintar FA(2)(3), Yoganandan N(2)(3)(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Biostatistics , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee ,
Wisconsin.
(2)b Department of Neurosurgery , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee ,
Wisconsin.
(3)c VA Medical Center , Milwaukee , Wisconsin.
(4)d Center for NeuroTrauma Research , Medical College of Wisconsin , Milwaukee ,
Wisconsin.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study is to present a novel framework, termed
the knockoff technique, to evaluate different metric ranking algorithms to better
describe human response to injury.
METHODS: Many biomechanical metrics are routinely obtained from impact tests
using postmortem human surrogates (PMHS) to develop injury risk curves (IRCs).
The IRCs form the basis to evaluate human safety in crashworthiness environments.
The biomechanical metrics should be chosen based on some measure of their
predictive ability. Commonly used algorithms for the choice of ranking the
metrics include (a) areas under the receiver operating characteristic curve
(AUROC), time-varying AUROC, and other adaptations, and (b) some variants of
predictive squared error loss. This article develops a rigorous framework to
evaluate the metric selection/ranking algorithms. Actual experimental data are
used due to the shortcoming of using simulated data. The knockoff data are meshed
into existing experimental data using advanced statistical algorithms. Error rate
measures such as false discovery rates (FDRs) and bias are calculated using the
knockoff technique. Experimental data are used from previously published
whole-body PMHS side impact sled tests. The experiments were conducted at
different velocities, padding and rigid load wall conditions, and offsets and
with different supplemental restraint systems. The PMHS specimens were subjected 
to a single lateral impact loading resulting in injury and noninjury outcomes.
RESULTS: A total of 25 metrics were used from 42 tests. The AUROC-type algorithms
tended to have higher FDRs compared to the squared error loss-type functions
(45.3% for the best AUROC-type algorithms versus 31.4% for the best Brier score
algorithm). Standard errors for the Brier score algorithm also tended to be
lower, indicative of more stable metric choices and robust rankings. The wide
variations observed in the performance of the algorithms demonstrated the need
for data set-specific evaluation tools such as the knockoff technique developed
in this study.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present data set, the AUROCs and related binary
classification algorithms led to inflated FDRs, rendering metric
selection/ranking questionable. This is particularly true for data sets with a
high proportion of censoring. Squared error loss-type algorithms (such as the
Brier score algorithm or its modifications) improved the performance in the
metric selection process. The presented new knockoff technique may wholly change 
how IRCs are developed from impact experiments or simulations. At the very least,
the knockoff technique demonstrates the need for evaluations among different
metric ranking/selection algorithms, especially when they produce substantially
different biomechanical metric choices. Without recommending the AUROC-type or
Brier score-type algorithms universally, the authors suggest careful assessments 
of these algorithms using the proposed framework, so that a robust algorithm may 
be chosen, with respect to the nature of the experimental data set. Though
results are given for sets from a published series of experiments, the knockoff
technique is being used by the authors in tests that are applicable to the
automotive, aviation, military, and other environments.

DOI: 10.1080/15389588.2018.1519805 
PMID: 30570337  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg. 2019 Feb;45(1):39-48. doi: 10.1007/s00068-018-1053-1.
Epub 2018 Dec 12.

Streamlining pre- and intra-hospital care for patients with severe trauma: a
white paper from the European Critical Care Foundation.

Longrois D(1), Maegele M(2), Bersini H(3), Crooks G(4), Hubloue I(5), Nowé A(6), 
Rimensberger PC(7), Sabbe M(8), Tilsed J(9), Vandemeulebroucke J(10)(11),
Verhelst W(10)(11), Vincent JL(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, Bichat-Claude Bernard Hospital, 
Assistance Publique, Hôpitaux de Paris, University Paris 7, Paris, France.
(2)Department of Traumatology, Orthopaedic Surgery and Sports Traumatology,
Cologne-Merheim Medical Centre (CMMC), Witten/Herdecke University, Cologne,
Germany.
(3)Iridia Labs, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Digital Health and Care Institute, University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK.
(5)Department of Emergency Medicine, Universitair Ziekenhuis, Brussels, Belgium.
(6)Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels,
Belgium.
(7)Department of Paediatrics, Service of Neonatology and Paediatric Intensive
Care, University Hospital of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland.
(8)Department of Emergency Medicine, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(9)Department of General Surgery, Hull Royal Infirmary, Hull, UK.
(10)Department of Electronics and Informatics (ETRO), Vrije Universiteit Brussel,
Brussels, Belgium.
(11)Interuniversity MicroElectronics Center (imec), Leuven, Belgium.
(12)Department of Intensive Care, Erasme Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Route de Lennik 808, 1070, Brussels, Belgium. jlvincent@intensive.org.

PURPOSE: Major trauma remains a significant cause of morbidity and mortality in
the developed and developing world. In 2013, nearly 5 million people worldwide
died from their injuries, and almost 1 billion individuals sustained injuries
that warranted some type of healthcare, accounting for around 10% of the global
burden of disease in general. Behind the statistics, severe trauma takes a major 
toll on individuals, their families and healthcare systems. Management of the
patient with severe trauma requires multiple interventions in a highly
time-sensitive context and fragmentation of care, characterised by loss of
information and time among disciplines, departments and individuals, both outside
the hospital and within it, is frequent. Outcomes may be improved by better
streamlining of pre- and intra-hospital care.
METHODS: We describe the basis for development of a multi-stakeholder consortium 
by the European Critical Care Foundation working closely with a number of
European Scientific Societies to address and overcome problems of fragmentation
in the care of patients with severe trauma.
RESULT: The consortium will develop and introduce an information management
system adapted to severe trauma, which will integrate continuous monitoring of
vital parameters and point-of-care diagnostics. The key innovation of the project
is to harness the power of information technologies and artificial intelligence
to provide computer-enhanced clinical evaluation and decision-support to
streamline the multiple points at which information and time are potentially
lost.
CONCLUSIONS: The severe trauma management platform thus created could have
multiple benefits beyond its immediate use in managing the care of injured
patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00068-018-1053-1 
PMID: 30542747  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2018 Nov 2;23(2):219-226. doi: 10.3171/2018.8.PEDS18370.

Using an artificial neural network to predict traumatic brain injury.

Hale AT(1)(2), Stonko DP(2)(3), Lim J(2), Guillamondegui OD(2)(3)(4), Shannon
CN(2)(4)(5), Patel MB(2)(6)(7)(4).

Author information: 
(1)1Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Medical Scientist Training Program.
(2)2Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee.
(3)3Johns Hopkins Medical Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland.
(4)6Department of Neurosurgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center and Division
of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Monroe Carell Jr. Children's Hospital of Vanderbilt
University; and.
(5)7Surgical Outcomes Center for Kids, Monroe Carell Jr. Children's Hospital of
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee.
(6)4Division of Trauma, Emergency General Surgery, and Surgical Critical Care,
Departments of Surgery and Hearing and Speech Sciences, Section of Surgical
Sciences, Vanderbilt University Medical Center.
(7)5Center for Health Services Research, Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center and Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center
Service, Surgical Service, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
Tennessee Valley Health Care System.

In BriefPediatric traumatic brain injury (TBI) is common, but not all injuries
require hospitalization. A computational tool for ruling-in patients who will
have clinically relevant TBI (CRTBI) would be valuable, providing an
evidence-based mechanism for safe discharge. Here, using data from 12,902
patients from the Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network (PECARN) TBI 
data set, the authors utilize artificial intelligence to predict CRTBI using
radiologist-interpreted CT information with > 99% sensitivity and an AUC of 0.99.

DOI: 10.3171/2018.8.PEDS18370 
PMID: 30485240 


25. PLoS One. 2018 Nov 9;13(11):e0207192. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207192.
eCollection 2018.

Mortality prediction in patients with isolated moderate and severe traumatic
brain injury using machine learning models.

Rau CS(1), Kuo PJ(2), Chien PC(2), Huang CY(3), Hsieh HY(2), Hsieh CH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Plastic Surgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and
Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Trauma Surgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: The purpose of this study was to build a model of machine learning
(ML) for the prediction of mortality in patients with isolated moderate and
severe traumatic brain injury (TBI).
METHODS: Hospitalized adult patients registered in the Trauma Registry System
between January 2009 and December 2015 were enrolled in this study. Only patients
with an Abbreviated Injury Scale (AIS) score ≥ 3 points related to head injuries 
were included in this study. A total of 1734 (1564 survival and 170 non-survival)
and 325 (293 survival and 32 non-survival) patients were included in the training
and test sets, respectively.
RESULTS: Using demographics and injury characteristics, as well as patient
laboratory data, predictive tools (e.g., logistic regression [LR], support vector
machine [SVM], decision tree [DT], naive Bayes [NB], and artificial neural
networks [ANN]) were used to determine the mortality of individual patients. The 
predictive performance was evaluated by accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity,
as well as by area under the curve (AUC) measures of receiver operator
characteristic curves. In the training set, all five ML models had a specificity 
of more than 90% and all ML models (except the NB) achieved an accuracy of more
than 90%. Among them, the ANN had the highest sensitivity (80.59%) in mortality
prediction. Regarding performance, the ANN had the highest AUC (0.968), followed 
by the LR (0.942), SVM (0.935), NB (0.908), and DT (0.872). In the test set, the 
ANN had the highest sensitivity (84.38%) in mortality prediction, followed by the
SVM (65.63%), LR (59.38%), NB (59.38%), and DT (43.75%).
CONCLUSIONS: The ANN model provided the best prediction of mortality for patients
with isolated moderate and severe TBI.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207192 
PMCID: PMC6226171
PMID: 30412613  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


26. PLoS One. 2018 Nov 7;13(11):e0206872. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206872.
eCollection 2018.

Defining heatwave thresholds using an inductive machine learning approach.

Park J(1), Kim J(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Urban and Environmental Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of
Science and Technology, Ulsan, South Korea.

Establishing appropriate heatwave thresholds is important in reducing adverse
human health consequences as it enables a more effective heatwave warning system 
and response plan. This paper defined such thresholds by focusing on the
non-linear relationship between heatwave outcomes and meteorological variables as
part of an inductive approach. Daily data on emergency department visitors who
were diagnosed with heat illnesses and information on 19 meteorological variables
were obtained for the years 2011 to 2016 from relevant government agencies. A
Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines (MARS) analysis was performed to explore
points (referred to as "knots") where the behaviour of the variables rapidly
changed. For all emergency department visitors, two thresholds (a maximum daily
temperature ≥ 32.58°C for 2 consecutive days and a heat index ≥ 79.64) were
selected based on the dramatic rise of morbidity at these points. Nonetheless,
visitors, who included children and outside workers diagnosed in the early summer
season, were reported as being sensitive to heatwaves at lower thresholds. The
average daytime temperature (from noon to 6 PM) was determined to represent an
alternative threshold for heatwaves. The findings have implications for exploring
complex heatwave-morbidity relationships and for developing appropriate
intervention strategies to prevent and mitigate the health impact of heatwaves.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206872 
PMCID: PMC6221332
PMID: 30403743  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


27. Am J Crit Care. 2018 Nov;27(6):461-468. doi: 10.4037/ajcc2018525.

Predicting Pressure Injury in Critical Care Patients: A Machine-Learning Model.

Alderden J(1), Pepper GA(2), Wilson A(2), Whitney JD(2), Richardson S(2), Butcher
R(2), Jo Y(2), Cummins MR(2).

Author information: 
(1)Jenny Alderden is an assistant professor, School of Nursing, Boise State
University, Boise, Idaho, and an adjunct assistant professor, College of Nursing,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah. Ginette Alyce Pepper is a professor,
and Andrew Wilson is a clinical assistant professor, College of Nursing,
University of Utah. Joanne D. Whitney is a professor, College of Nursing,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington. Stephanie Richardson is a
professor, Rocky Mountain University of the Health Professions, Provo, Utah. Ryan
Butcher is a senior data architect, Biomedical Informatics Team, Center for
Clinical and Translational Science, University of Utah. Yeonjung Jo is a doctoral
(PhD) student in population health science, College of Nursing, University of
Utah. Mollie Rebecca Cummins is a professor, College of Nursing, University of
Utah. jennyalderden@boisestate.edu.
(2)Jenny Alderden is an assistant professor, School of Nursing, Boise State
University, Boise, Idaho, and an adjunct assistant professor, College of Nursing,
University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah. Ginette Alyce Pepper is a professor,
and Andrew Wilson is a clinical assistant professor, College of Nursing,
University of Utah. Joanne D. Whitney is a professor, College of Nursing,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington. Stephanie Richardson is a
professor, Rocky Mountain University of the Health Professions, Provo, Utah. Ryan
Butcher is a senior data architect, Biomedical Informatics Team, Center for
Clinical and Translational Science, University of Utah. Yeonjung Jo is a doctoral
(PhD) student in population health science, College of Nursing, University of
Utah. Mollie Rebecca Cummins is a professor, College of Nursing, University of
Utah.

BACKGROUND: Hospital-acquired pressure injuries are a serious problem among
critical care patients. Some can be prevented by using measures such as specialty
beds, which are not feasible for every patient because of costs. However,
decisions about which patient would benefit most from a specialty bed are
difficult because results of existing tools to determine risk for pressure injury
indicate that most critical care patients are at high risk.
OBJECTIVE: To develop a model for predicting development of pressure injuries
among surgical critical care patients.
METHODS: Data from electronic health records were divided into training (67%) and
testing (33%) data sets, and a model was developed by using a random forest
algorithm via the R package "randomforest."
RESULTS: Among a sample of 6376 patients, hospital-acquired pressure injuries of 
stage 1 or greater (outcome variable 1) developed in 516 patients (8.1%) and
injuries of stage 2 or greater (outcome variable 2) developed in 257 (4.0%).
Random forest models were developed to predict stage 1 and greater and stage 2
and greater injuries by using the testing set to evaluate classifier performance.
The area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for both models was
0.79.
CONCLUSION: This machine-learning approach differs from other available models
because it does not require clinicians to input information into a tool (eg, the 
Braden Scale). Rather, it uses information readily available in electronic health
records. Next steps include testing in an independent sample and then calibration
to optimize specificity.

©2018 American Association of Critical-Care Nurses.

DOI: 10.4037/ajcc2018525 
PMCID: PMC6247790
PMID: 30385537 


28. Curr Opin Neurol. 2018 Dec;31(6):702-708. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000614.

Neurotrauma as a big-data problem.

Huie JR(1)(2), Almeida CA(1)(2), Ferguson AR(1)(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Weill Institute of Neurosciences, Brain and Spinal Injury Center (BASIC),
University of California, San Francisco.
(2)Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital and Trauma Center, San Francisco.
(3)San Francisco Veterans Affairs Healthcare System, San Francisco, California,
USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The field of neurotrauma research faces a reproducibility
crisis. In response, research leaders in traumatic brain injury (TBI) and spinal 
cord injury (SCI) are leveraging data curation and analytics methods to encourage
transparency, and improve the rigor and reproducibility. Here we review the
current challenges and opportunities that come from efforts to transform
neurotrauma's big data to knowledge.
RECENT FINDINGS: Three parallel movements are driving data-driven-discovery in
neurotrauma. First, large multicenter consortia are collecting large quantities
of neurotrauma data, refining common data elements (CDEs) that can be used across
studies. Investigators are now testing the validity of CDEs in diverse research
settings. Second, data sharing initiatives are working to make neurotrauma data
findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR). These efforts are
reflected by recent open data repository projects for preclinical and clinical
neurotrauma. Third, machine learning analytics are allowing researchers to
uncover novel data-driven-hypotheses and test new therapeutics in
multidimensional outcome space.
SUMMARY: We are on the threshold of a new era in data collection, curation, and
analysis. The next phase of big data in neurotrauma research will require
responsible data stewardship, a culture of data-sharing, and the illumination of 
'dark data'.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000614 
PMID: 30379703  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2018 Nov 15;102(4):1236-1243. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2018.05.041. Epub 2018 May 24.

Distinguishing True Progression From Radionecrosis After Stereotactic Radiation
Therapy for Brain Metastases With Machine Learning and Radiomics.

Peng L(1), Parekh V(2), Huang P(3), Lin DD(2), Sheikh K(1), Baker B(1),
Kirschbaum T(1), Silvestri F(1), Son J(1), Robinson A(1), Huang E(1), Ames H(4), 
Grimm J(1), Chen L(1), Shen C(1), Soike M(5), McTyre E(5), Redmond K(1), Lim
M(6), Lee J(1), Jacobs MA(2), Kleinberg L(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD.
(2)The Russell H. Morgan Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
(3)Department of Oncology-Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Division, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.
(4)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD.
(5)Department of Radiation Oncology, Wake Forest Baptist Health, Winston-Salem,
NC.
(6)Department of Neurosurgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD.
(7)Department of Radiation Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD. Electronic address: kleinla@jhmi.edu.

PURPOSE: Treatment effect or radiation necrosis after stereotactic radiosurgery
(SRS) for brain metastases is a common phenomenon often indistinguishable from
true progression. Radiomics is an emerging field that promises to improve on
conventional imaging. In this study, we sought to apply a radiomics-based
prediction model to the problem of diagnosing treatment effect after SRS.
METHODS AND MATERIALS: We included patients in the Johns Hopkins Health System
who were treated with SRS for brain metastases who subsequently underwent
resection for symptomatic growth. We also included cases of likely treatment
effect in which lesions grew but subsequently regressed spontaneously. Lesions
were segmented semiautomatically on preoperative T1 postcontrast and T2
fluid-attenuated inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging, and radiomic
features were extracted with software developed in-house. Top-performing features
on univariate logistic regression were entered into a hybrid feature
selection/classification model, IsoSVM, with parameter optimization and further
feature selection performed using leave-one-out cross-validation. Final model
performance was assessed by 10-fold cross-validation with 100 repeats. All cases 
were independently reviewed by a board-certified neuroradiologist for comparison.
RESULTS: We identified 82 treated lesions across 66 patients, with 77 lesions
having pathologic confirmation. There were 51 radiomic features extracted per
segmented lesion on each magnetic resonance imaging sequence. An optimized IsoSVM
classifier based on top-ranked radiomic features had sensitivity and specificity 
of 65.38% and 86.67%, respectively, with an area under the curve of 0.81 on
leave-one-out cross-validation. Only 73% of cases were classifiable by the
neuroradiologist, with a sensitivity of 97% and specificity of 19%.
CONCLUSIONS: Radiomics holds promise for differentiating between treatment effect
and true progression in brain metastases treated with SRS. A predictive model
built on radiomic features from an institutional cohort performed well on
cross-validation testing. These results warrant further validation in independent
datasets. Such work could prove invaluable for guiding management of individual
patients and assessing outcomes of novel interventions.

Copyright © 2018. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2018.05.041 
PMID: 30353872  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. PLoS One. 2018 Oct 23;13(10):e0206006. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206006.
eCollection 2018.

A data-driven artificial intelligence model for remote triage in the prehospital 
environment.

Kim D(1), You S(2), So S(2), Lee J(2), Yook S(2), Jang DP(2), Kim IY(2), Park
E(3), Cho K(3), Cha WC(4)(5), Shin DW(5)(6), Cho BH(3)(7), Park HK(8).

Author information: 
(1)Convergence Research Center for Diagnosis, Treatment, and Care of Dementia,
Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Smart Healthcare & Device Research Center, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(4)Department of Emergency Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(5)Department of Digital Health, Samsung Advanced Institute for Health Sciences &
Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South Korea.
(6)Department of Family Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(7)Department of Medical Device Management and Research, Samsung Advanced
Institute for Health Sciences & Technology, Sungkyunkwan University, Seoul, South
Korea.
(8)Department of Family Medicine, Hanyang University College of Medicine, Seoul, 
South Korea.

In a mass casualty incident, the factors that determine the survival rate of
injured patients are diverse, but one of the key factors is the time for triage. 
Additionally, the main factor that determines the time of triage is the number of
medical personnel. However, when relying on a small number of medical personnel, 
the ability to increase survivability is limited. Therefore, developing a
classification model for survival prediction that can quickly and precisely
triage via wearable devices without medical personnel is important. In this
study, we designed a consciousness index to substitute the factor by manpower and
improved the classification accuracy by applying a machine learning algorithm.
First, logistic regression analysis using vital signs and a consciousness index
capable of remote monitoring through wearable devices confirmed the high
efficiency of the consciousness index. We then developed a classification model
with high accuracy which corresponds to existing injury severity scoring systems 
through the machine learning algorithms. We extracted 460,865 cases which met our
criteria for developing the survival prediction from the national sample project 
in the national trauma databank which contains 408,316 cases of blunt injury and 
52,549 cases of penetrating injury. Among the dataset, 17,918 (3.9%) cases died
while the other survived. The AUCs with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the
different models with the proposed simplified consciousness score as follows: RTS
(as baseline), 0.78 (95% CI = 0.775 to 0.785); logistic regression, 0.87 (95% CI 
= 0.862 to 0.870); random forest, 0.87 (95% CI = 0.862 to 0.872); deep neural
network, 0.89 (95% CI = 0.882 to 0.890). As a result, we confirmed the
possibility of remote triage using a wearable device. It is expected that the
time required for triage can be effectively reduced by using the developed
classification model of survival prediction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0206006 
PMCID: PMC6198975
PMID: 30352077  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


31. PLoS One. 2018 Oct 15;13(10):e0205836. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0205836.
eCollection 2018.

Validation of deep-learning-based triage and acuity score using a large national 
dataset.

Kwon JM(1), Lee Y(2), Lee Y(2), Lee S(2), Park H(2), Park J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Mediplex Sejong Hospital, Incheon, Korea.
(2)VUNO, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Cardiology, Mediplex Sejong Hospital, Incheon, Korea.

AIM: Triage is important in identifying high-risk patients amongst many less
urgent patients as emergency department (ED) overcrowding has become a national
crisis recently. This study aims to validate that a Deep-learning-based Triage
and Acuity Score (DTAS) identifies high-risk patients more accurately than
existing triage and acuity scores using a large national dataset.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective observational cohort study using data from 
the Korean National Emergency Department Information System (NEDIS), which
collected data on visits in real time from 151 EDs. The NEDIS data was split into
derivation data (January 2014-June 2016) and validation data (July-December
2016). We also used data from the Sejong General Hospital (SGH) for external
validation (January-December 2017). We predicted in-hospital mortality, critical 
care, and hospitalization using initial information of ED patients (age, sex,
chief complaint, time from symptom onset to ED visit, arrival mode, trauma,
initial vital signs and mental status as predictor variables).
RESULTS: A total of 11,656,559 patients were included in this study. The primary 
outcome was in-hospital mortality. The Area Under the Receiver Operating
Characteristic curve (AUROC) and Area Under the Precision and Recall Curve
(AUPRC) of DTAS were 0.935 and 0.264. It significantly outperformed Korean triage
and acuity score (AUROC:0.785, AUPRC:0.192), modified early warning score
(AUROC:0.810, AUPRC:0.116), logistic regression (AUROC:0.903, AUPRC:0.209), and
random forest (AUROC:0.910, AUPRC:0.179).
CONCLUSION: Deep-learning-based Triage and Acuity Score predicted in-hospital
mortality, critical care, and hospitalization more accurately than existing
triages and acuity, and it was validated using a large, multicenter dataset.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0205836 
PMCID: PMC6188844
PMID: 30321231  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: VUNO provided support in the form of salaries for
authors (Youngnam Lee, Yeha Lee, Seungwoo Lee, and Hyunho Park), but did not have
any additional role in the study design, data collection, and analysis, decision 
to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. Dr. Yeha Lee is the co-founder and 
stakeholder in VUNO Inc., a medical artificial intelligence company. Mr. Youngnam
Lee and Hyunho Park are employees of VUNO Inc. Mr. Seungwoo Lee was an employee
of VUNO Inc. There are no patents, products in development or marketed products
to declare. This does not alter our adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing
data and materials.


32. Front Neurol. 2018 Sep 25;9:761. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00761. eCollection 2018.

Continuous Vital Sign Analysis to Predict Secondary Neurological Decline After
Traumatic Brain Injury.

Melinosky C(1)(2), Yang S(1)(3), Hu P(1)(3), Li H(3), Miller CHT(4), Khan
I(1)(2), Mackenzie C(1)(3), Chang WT(1)(5), Parikh G(1)(2), Stein D(1)(6),
Badjatia N(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Trauma, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD,
United States.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, United States.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, United States.
(4)Enroute care Division, Department of Aeromedical Research, U.S. Air Force
School of Aerospace Medicine, Wright Patterson AFB, Dayton, OH, United States.
(5)Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD, United States.
(6)Department of Surgery, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD, United States.

Background: In the acute resuscitation period after traumatic brain injury (TBI),
one of the goals is to identify those at risk for secondary neurological decline 
(ND), represented by a constellation of clinical signs that can be identified as 
objective events related to secondary brain injury and independently impact
outcome. We investigated whether continuous vital sign variability and waveform
analysis of the electrocardiogram (ECG) or photoplethysmogram (PPG) within the
first hour of resuscitation may enhance the ability to predict ND in the initial 
48 hours after traumatic brain injury (TBI). Methods: Retrospective analysis of
ND in TBI patients enrolled in the prospective Oximetry and Noninvasive
Predictors Of Intervention Need after Trauma (ONPOINT) study. ND was defined as
any of the following occurring in the first 48 h: new asymmetric pupillary
dilatation (>2 mm), 2 point GCS decline, interval worsening of CT scan as
assessed by the Marshall score, or intervention for cerebral edema. Beat-to-beat 
variation of ECG or PPG, as well as waveform features during the first 15 and 60 
min after arrival in the TRU were analyzed to determine physiologic parameters
associated with future ND. Physiologic and admission clinical variables were
combined in multivariable logistic regression models predicting ND and inpatient 
mortality. Results: There were 33 (17%) patients with ND among 191 patients (mean
age 43 years old, GCS 13, ISS 12, 69% men) who met study criteria. ND was
associated with ICU admission (P < 0.001) and inpatient mortality (P < 0.001).
Both ECG (AUROC: 0.84, 95% CI: 0.76,0.93) and PPG (AUROC: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.80,
0.93) analyses during the first 15 min of resuscitation demonstrated a greater
ability to predict ND then clinical characteristics alone (AUROC: 0.69, 95% CI:
0.59, 0.8). Age (P = 0.02), Marshall score (P = 0.001), penetrating injury (P =
0.02), and predictive probability for ND by PPG analysis at 15 min (P = 0.03)
were independently associated with inpatient mortality. Conclusions: Analysis of 
variability and ECG or PPG waveform in the first minutes of resuscitation may
represent a non-invasive early marker of future ND.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2018.00761 
PMCID: PMC6167472
PMID: 30319521 


33. Am J Gastroenterol. 2019 Mar;114(3):422-428. doi: 10.1038/s41395-018-0268-4.

Artificial Intelligence-Assisted Gastroenterology- Promises and Pitfalls.

Ruffle JK(1), Farmer AD(1)(2), Aziz Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroscience and Trauma, Blizard Institute, Wingate Institute of
Neurogastroenterology, Barts and the London School of Medicine & Dentistry, Queen
Mary University of London, 26 Ashfield Street, London, E1 2AJ, UK.
(2)Institute of Applied Clinical Science, University of Keele, Staffordshire, ST5
5BG, UK.

Technological advances in artificial intelligence (AI) represent an enticing
opportunity to benefit gastroenterological practice. Moreover, AI, through
machine or deep learning, permits the ability to develop predictive models from
large datasets. Possibilities of predictive model development in machine learning
are numerous dependent on the clinical question. For example, binary classifiers 
aim to stratify allocation to a categorical outcome, such as the presence or
absence of a gastrointestinal disease. In addition, continuous variable fitting
techniques can be used to predict quantity of a therapeutic response, thus
offering a tool to predict which therapeutic intervention may be most beneficial 
to the given patient. Namely, this permits an important opportunity for
personalization of medicine, including a movement from guideline-specific
treatment algorithms to patient-specific ones, providing both clinician and
patient the capacity for data-driven decision making. Furthermore, such analyses 
could predict the development of GI disease prior to the manifestation of
symptoms, raising the possibility of prevention or pre-treatment. In addition,
computer vision additionally provides an exciting opportunity in endoscopy to
automatically detect lesions. In this review, we overview the recent developments
in healthcare-based AI and machine learning and describe promises and pitfalls
for its application to gastroenterology.

DOI: 10.1038/s41395-018-0268-4 
PMID: 30315284 


34. Asian J Neurosurg. 2018 Jul-Sep;13(3):697-702. doi: 10.4103/ajns.AJNS_336_16.

The Benefits of Decision Tree to Predict Survival in Patients with Glioblastoma
Multiforme with the Use of Clinical and Imaging Features.

Nematollahi M(1)(2), Jajroudi M(3), Arbabi F(4), Azarhomayoun A(5)(6), Azimifar
Z(7).

Author information: 
(1)Anesthesiology and Critical Care Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical
Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(2)Department of Medical Informatics, School of Management and Medical
Information Sciences, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(3)Department of Oncology, School of Medicine, Zahedan University of Medical
Sciences, Zahedan, Iran.
(4)Sina Trauma Research Center, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran.
(5)Department of Neurosurgery, Sina Hospital, Tehran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran.
(6)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Shiraz University, Shiraz, 
Iran.
(7)School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Shiraz University, Shiraz,
Iran.

Background: Machine learning is a type of artificial intelligence which aims to
improve machine with the ability of extracting knowledge from the environment.
Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is one of the most common and aggressive primary
malignant brain tumors in adults. Due to a low rate of survival in patients with 
these tumors, machine learning can help physicians for better decision-making.
The aim of this paper is to develop a machine learning model for predicting the
survival rate of patients with GBM based on clinical features and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI).
Materials and Methods: The present investigation is an observational study
conducted to predict the survival rate in patients with GBM in 12 months.
Fifty-five patients who were registered in five Iranian Hospitals (Tehran) during
2012-2014 were selected in this study.
Results: This study used Cox and C5.0 decision tree models based on clinical
features and combined them with MRI. Accuracy, sensitivity, and specification
parameters used to evaluate the models. The result of Cox and C5.0 for clinical
feature was <32.73%, 22.5%, 45.83%>, <72.73%, 67.74%, 79.19%>, respectively;
also, the result of Cox and C5.0 for both features was <60%, 48.58%, 75%>,
<90.91%, 96.77%, 88.33%>, respectively.
Conclusion: Using C5.0 decision tree model in both survival models including
clinical features, both the imaging features and the clinical features as the
covariates, shows additional predictive values and better results. The tumor
width and Karnofsky performance status scores were determined as the most
important parameters in the survival prediction of these types of patients.

DOI: 10.4103/ajns.AJNS_336_16 
PMCID: PMC6159095
PMID: 30283530 

Conflict of interest statement: There are no conflicts of interest.


35. Gait Posture. 2018 Oct;66:194-200. doi: 10.1016/j.gaitpost.2018.08.026. Epub 2018
Aug 24.

Pre-operative sensor-based gait parameters predict functional outcome after total
knee arthroplasty.

Kluge F(1), Hannink J(2), Pasluosta C(3), Klucken J(4), Gaßner H(5), Gelse K(6), 
Eskofier BM(7), Krinner S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Machine Learning and Data Analytics Lab, Department of Computer Science,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Carl-Thiersch-Str. 2b,
91052 Erlangen, Germany. Electronic address: felix.kluge@fau.de.
(2)Machine Learning and Data Analytics Lab, Department of Computer Science,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Carl-Thiersch-Str. 2b,
91052 Erlangen, Germany. Electronic address: julius.hannink@fau.de.
(3)Laboratory for Biomedical Microtechnology, Department of Microsystems
Engineering, University of Freiburg, 79110 Freiburg, Germany. Electronic address:
cristian.pasluosta@imtek.uni-freiburg.de.
(4)Molecular Neurology, University Hospital Erlangen, Schwabachanlage 6, 91054
Erlangen, Germany. Electronic address: jochen.klucken@uk-erlangen.de.
(5)Molecular Neurology, University Hospital Erlangen, Schwabachanlage 6, 91054
Erlangen, Germany. Electronic address: heiko.gassner@uk-erlangen.de.
(6)Department of Trauma Surgery, University Hospital Erlangen, Krankenhausstrasse
12, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. Electronic address: kolja.gelse@uk-erlangen.de.
(7)Machine Learning and Data Analytics Lab, Department of Computer Science,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Carl-Thiersch-Str. 2b,
91052 Erlangen, Germany. Electronic address: bjoern.eskofier@fau.de.
(8)Department of Trauma Surgery, University Hospital Erlangen, Krankenhausstrasse
12, 91054 Erlangen, Germany. Electronic address:
sebastian.krinner@uk-erlangen.de.

BACKGROUND: Despite the general success of total knee arthroplasty (TKA)
regarding patient-reported outcome measures, studies investigating gait function 
have shown diverse functional outcomes. Mobile sensor-based systems have recently
been employed for accurate clinical gait assessments, as they allow a better
integration of gait analysis into clinical routines as compared to laboratory
based systems.
RESEARCH QUESTION: In this study, we sought to examine whether an accurate
assessment of gait function of knee osteoarthritis patients with respect to
surgery outcome evaluation after TKA using a mobile sensor-based gait analysis
system is possible.
METHODS: A foot-worn sensor-based system was used to assess spatio-temporal gait 
parameters of 24 knee osteoarthritis patients one day before and one year after
TKA, and in comparison to matched control participants. Patients were clustered
into positive and negative responder groups using a heuristic approach regarding 
improvements in gait function. Machine learning was used to predict surgery
outcome based on pre-operative gait parameters.
RESULTS: Gait function differed significantly between controls and patients.
Patient-reported outcome measures improved significantly after surgery, but no
significant global gait parameter difference was observed between pre- and
post-operative status. However, the responder groups could be correctly predicted
with an accuracy of up to 89% using pre-operative gait parameters. Patients
exhibiting high pre-operative gait function were more likely to experience a
functional decrease after surgery. Important gait parameters for the
discrimination were stride time and stride length.
SIGNIFICANCE: The early identification of post-surgical functional outcomes of
patients is of great importance to better inform patients pre-operatively
regarding surgery success and to improve post-surgical management.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaitpost.2018.08.026 
PMID: 30199778  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Accid Anal Prev. 2018 Nov;120:152-164. doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2018.08.011. Epub 2018 
Aug 20.

Design and experiment verification of a novel analysis framework for recognition 
of driver injury patterns: From a multi-class classification perspective.

Zhu M(1), Li Y(2), Wang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology,
Beijing, 100081, PR China.
(2)School of Information and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology,
Beijing, 100081, PR China; Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA. Electronic address:
liyunjie@bit.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, 98195, USA.

Detecting driver injury patterns is a typical classification problem. Crash data 
sets are highly skewed where fatalities and severe injuries are often less
represented compared to other events. The severity prediction performance of the 
existing models is poor due to the highly imbalanced samples of different
severity levels within a given dataset. This paper proposes a machine learning
based analysis framework from a multi-class classification perspective for
accurate recognition of the driver injury patterns. The proposed framework
includes preprocessing, classification, evaluation and application of a given
dataset. This framework is verified based on the three years single-vehicle ROR
(run-off-road) crash records collected in Washington State from 2011 to 2013. At 
first, thirteen most important safety-related variables are recognized through
random forests. Then, the four driver's injury severity levels viz.,
fatal/serious injury, evident injury, possible injury, and no injury are
predicted by integrating the decomposed binary neural network models to achieve
better performance. Finally, a sensitivity analysis is carried out to interpret
variables' impacts on the decomposed injury severity levels. The study shows that
lack of restraint, female drivers, truck usage, driver impairment, driver
distraction, vehicle overturn (rollover), dawn/dusk, and overtaking are the
leading factors contributing to the driver fatalities or severe injuries in a
single-vehicle ROR crash. Most of the findings are consistent with the previous
studies. The experimental results validate the effectiveness of the proposed
framework which can be further applied for pattern recognition in traffic safety 
research.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2018.08.011 
PMID: 30138770  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. BMJ Qual Saf. 2019 Feb;28(2):132-141. doi: 10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007505. Epub 2018
Aug 10.

Value of hospital resources for effective pressure injury prevention: a
cost-effectiveness analysis.

Padula WV(1), Pronovost PJ(2)(3), Makic MBF(4), Wald HL(5), Moran D(6), Mishra
MK(7), Meltzer DO(8).

Author information: 
(1)Health Policy & Management, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Armstrong Institute for Patient Safety and Quality, Johns Hopkins Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(3)Anesthesiology & Critical Care Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(4)College of Nursing, University of Colorado, Aurora, Colorado, USA.
(5)Medicine, University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, 
USA.
(6)Emergency Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.
(7)Community and Family Medicine, Dartmouth College Geisel School of Medicine,
Hanover, New Hampshire, USA.
(8)Department of Medicine, Center for Health and the Social Sciences, University 
of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Hospital-acquired pressure injuries are localised skin injuries that
cause significant mortality and are costly. Nursing best practices prevent
pressure injuries, including time-consuming, complex tasks that lack payment
incentives. The Braden Scale is an evidence-based stratification tool nurses use 
daily to assess pressure-injury risk. Our objective was to analyse the
cost-utility of performing repeated risk-assessment for pressure-injury
prevention in all patients or high-risk groups.
DESIGN: Cost-utility analysis using Markov modelling from US societal and
healthcare sector perspectives within a 1-year time horizon.
SETTING: Patient-level longitudinal data on 34 787 encounters from an academic
hospital electronic health record (EHR) between 2011 and 2014, including daily
Braden scores. Supervised machine learning simulated age-adjusted transition
probabilities between risk levels and pressure injuries.
PARTICIPANTS: Hospitalised adults with Braden scores classified into five risk
levels: very high risk (6-9), high risk (10-11), moderate risk (12-14), at-risk
(15-18), minimal risk (19-23).
INTERVENTIONS: Standard care, repeated risk assessment in all risk levels or only
repeated risk assessment in high-risk strata based on machine-learning
simulations.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Costs (2016 $US) of pressure-injury treatment and
prevention, and quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) related to pressure injuries 
were weighted by transition probabilities to calculate the incremental
cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) at $100 000/QALY willingness-to-pay. Univariate
and probabilistic sensitivity analyses tested model uncertainty.
RESULTS: Simulating prevention for all patients yielded greater QALYs at higher
cost from societal and healthcare sector perspectives, equating to ICERs of
$2000/QALY and $2142/QALY, respectively. Risk-stratified follow-up in patients
with Braden scores <15 dominated standard care. Prevention for all patients was
cost-effective in >99% of probabilistic simulations.
CONCLUSION: Our analysis using EHR data maintains that pressure-injury prevention
for all inpatients is cost-effective. Hospitals should invest in nursing
compliance with international prevention guidelines.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2019. Re-use permitted under CC BY-NC. No
commercial re-use. See rights and permissions. Published by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjqs-2017-007505 
PMCID: PMC6365919
PMID: 30097490 

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


38. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2018 Nov;85(5):921-927. doi:
10.1097/TA.0000000000002044.

Machine learning without borders? An adaptable tool to optimize mortality
prediction in diverse clinical settings.

Christie SA(1), Hubbard AE, Callcut RA, Hameed M, Dissak-Delon FN, Mekolo D,
Saidou A, Mefire AC, Nsongoo P, Dicker RA, Cohen MJ, Juillard C.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Surgery (S.A.C., R.A.C., C.J.), University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, California; Department of Biostatistics 
(A.E.H.), University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California; Division of
General Surgery (M.H.), Vancouver General Hospital, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Littoral Regional Delegation of
the Ministry of Public Health, Cameroon (F.N.D.-D.), Douala, Cameroon;
Laquintinie Hospital of Douala, Douala, Cameroon (D.M., A.S.); Regional Hospital 
of Limbe, Limbe, Cameroon (A.C.M.); Catholic Hospital of Pouma, Pouma, Cameroon
(P.N.); Department of Surgery (R.A.D.), University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California; and Denver Health Medical Center and the University of
Colorado, Denver, Colorado (M.J.C.).

BACKGROUND: Mortality prediction aids clinical decision making and is necessary
for quality improvement initiatives. Validated metrics rely on prespecified
variables and often require advanced diagnostics, which are unfeasible in
resource-constrained contexts. We hypothesize that machine learning will generate
superior mortality prediction in both high-income and low- and middle-income
country cohorts.
METHODS: SuperLearner, an ensemble machine-learning algorithm, was applied to
data from three prospective trauma cohorts: a highest-activation cohort in the
United States, a high-volume center cohort in South Africa (SA), and a
multicenter registry in Cameroon. Cross-validation was used to assess model
discrimination of discharge mortality by site using receiver operating
characteristic curves. SuperLearner discrimination was compared with standard
scoring methods. Clinical variables driving SuperLearner prediction at each site 
were evaluated.
RESULTS: Data from 28,212 injured patients were used to generate prediction.
Discharge mortality was 17%, 1.3%, and 1.7% among US, SA, and Cameroonian
cohorts. SuperLearner delivered superior prediction of discharge mortality in the
United States (area under the curve [AUC], 94-97%) and vastly superior prediction
in Cameroon (AUC, 90-94%) compared with conventional scoring algorithms. It
provided similar prediction to standard scores in the SA cohort (AUC, 90-95%).
Context-specific variables (partial thromboplastin time in the United States and 
hospital distance in Cameroon) were prime drivers of predicted mortality in their
respective cohorts, whereas severe brain injury predicted mortality across sites.
CONCLUSIONS: Machine learning provides excellent discrimination of injury
mortality in diverse settings. Unlike traditional scores, data-adaptive methods
are well suited to optimizing precise site-specific prediction regardless of
diagnostic capabilities or data set inclusion allowing for individualized
decision making and expanded access to quality improvement programming.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Prognostic and therapeutic, level II and III.

DOI: 10.1097/TA.0000000000002044 
PMCID: PMC6225991 [Available on 2019-11-01]
PMID: 30059457 


39. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2018 Aug;211(2):392-399. doi: 10.2214/AJR.17.19188. Epub
2018 Jul 5.

The Impact of Risk Standardization on Variation in CT Use and Emergency Physician
Profiling.

Taylor RA(1), Melnick E(1), Fleishman W(2), Venkatesh A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Emergency Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, 454
Congress Ave, Ste 260, New Haven, CT 06519.
(2)2 Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Maryland, College Park, MD.

OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to use detailed electronic health record 
data to profile the use of condition-specific, risk-standardized imaging by
emergency physicians.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: CT utilization in four emergency departments in a single
health care system was retrospectively analyzed. The primary outcome for analysis
was indication-specific, risk-standardized CT utilization. We constructed seven
clinical cohorts on the basis of the presence or absence of a traumatic
indication for the most frequently performed CT studies. Risk standardization was
performed using machine learning algorithms and hierarchic logistic regression
models. Variation in CT utilization for each cohort was analyzed using
coefficients of variation and box plots, the effect of risk standardization on
physician profiling was determined using slope diagrams and kappa values, and
within-physician correlation was assessed using correlation coefficients and
matrices.
RESULTS: For the seven cohorts, the number of physicians ordering more than 25 CT
studies for a particular indication ranged from 70 to 88, and the number of ED
visits ranged from 17,458 to 117,489. The unadjusted variation was large for each
indication (coefficient of variation, 30.2-57.9). Risk standardization resulted
in reduced but persistent variation for all indications (coefficient of
variation, 12.3-22.3). Among indication-specific models, risk standardization
resulted in reclassification by two or more deciles for 14.0-39.1% of physicians.
The R value for within-physician correlation varied from 0.02 to 0.80 and was
highest between chest and abdominal imaging for trauma.
CONCLUSION: In this multisite study of CT utilization, risk standardization had a
substantial impact on variation in CT utilization and emergency physician
profiling. Administrators and payers should include risk standardization in
future measures of physician imaging to ensure valid assessment of performance
and achieve improvements in emergency care value.

DOI: 10.2214/AJR.17.19188 
PMID: 29975119  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Neurosci Bull. 2018 Aug;34(4):647-658. doi: 10.1007/s12264-018-0250-6. Epub 2018 
Jun 29.

Abnormal Effective Connectivity of the Anterior Forebrain Regions in Disorders of
Consciousness.

Chen P(1), Xie Q(2), Wu X(1), Huang H(1), Lv W(2), Chen L(1), Guo Y(2), Zhang
S(1), Hu H(1), Wang Y(3), Nie Y(4), Yu R(5), Huang R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for the Study of Applied Psychology, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Mental
Health and Cognitive Science, School of Psychology, Institute for Brain Research 
and Rehabilitation, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, 510631, China.
(2)Centre for Hyperbaric Oxygen and Neurorehabilitation, Guangzhou General
Hospital of Guangzhou Military Command, Guangzhou, 510010, China.
(3)Department of Psychology, School of Public Health, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou, 510515, China.
(4)School of Education, Guangzhou University, Guangzhou, 510006, China.
(5)Centre for Hyperbaric Oxygen and Neurorehabilitation, Guangzhou General
Hospital of Guangzhou Military Command, Guangzhou, 510010, China.
gesund@21cn.com.
(6)Center for the Study of Applied Psychology, Guangdong Key Laboratory of Mental
Health and Cognitive Science, School of Psychology, Institute for Brain Research 
and Rehabilitation, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, 510631, China.
ruiwang.huang@gmail.com.

A number of studies have indicated that disorders of consciousness result from
multifocal injuries as well as from the impaired functional and anatomical
connectivity between various anterior forebrain regions. However, the specific
causal mechanism linking these regions remains unclear. In this study, we used
spectral dynamic causal modeling to assess how the effective connections (ECs)
between various regions differ between individuals. Next, we used
connectome-based predictive modeling to evaluate the performance of the ECs in
predicting the clinical scores of DOC patients. We found increased ECs from the
striatum to the globus pallidus as well as from the globus pallidus to the
posterior cingulate cortex, and decreased ECs from the globus pallidus to the
thalamus and from the medial prefrontal cortex to the striatum in DOC patients as
compared to healthy controls. Prediction of the patients' outcome was effective
using the negative ECs as features. In summary, the present study highlights a
key role of the thalamo-basal ganglia-cortical loop in DOCs and supports the
anterior forebrain mesocircuit hypothesis. Furthermore, EC could be potentially
used to assess the consciousness level.

DOI: 10.1007/s12264-018-0250-6 
PMCID: PMC6060215 [Available on 2019-08-01]
PMID: 29959668  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Surg Res. 2018 Aug;228:179-187. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2018.03.028. Epub 2018 Apr
11.

Using artificial intelligence to predict prolonged mechanical ventilation and
tracheostomy placement.

Parreco J(1), Hidalgo A(1), Parks JJ(1), Kozol R(1), Rattan R(2).

Author information: 
(1)DeWitt Daughtry Family Department of Surgery, University of Miami, Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.
(2)Division of Trauma Surgery and Surgical Critical Care, DeWitt Daughtry Family 
Department of Surgery, University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami,
Florida. Electronic address: rrattan@med.miami.edu.

BACKGROUND: Early identification of critically ill patients who will require
prolonged mechanical ventilation (PMV) has proven to be difficult. The purpose of
this study was to use machine learning to identify patients at risk for PMV and
tracheostomy placement.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The Multiparameter Intelligent Monitoring in Intensive
Care III database was queried for all intensive care unit (ICU) stays with
mechanical ventilation. PMV was defined as ventilation >7 d. Classifiers with a
gradient-boosted decision trees algorithm were created for the outcomes of PMV
and tracheostomy placement. The variables used were six different
severity-of-illness scores calculated on the first day of ICU admission including
their components and 30 comorbidities. Mean receiver operating characteristic
curves were calculated for the outcomes, and variable importance was quantified.
RESULTS: There were 20,262 ICU stays identified. PMV was required in 13.6%, and
tracheostomy was performed in 6.6% of patients. The classifier for predicting PMV
was able to achieve a mean area under the curve (AUC) of 0.820 ± 0.016, and
tracheostomy was predicted with an AUC of 0.830 ± 0.011. There were 60.7%
patients admitted to a surgical ICU, and the classifiers for these patients
predicted PMV with an AUC of 0.852 ± 0.017 and tracheostomy with an AUC of
0.869 ± 0.015. The variable with the highest importance for predicting PMV was
the logistic organ dysfunction score pulmonary component (13%), and the most
important comorbidity in predicting tracheostomy was cardiac arrhythmia (12%).
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates the use of artificial intelligence through
machine-learning classifiers for the early identification of patients at risk for
PMV and tracheostomy. Application of these identification techniques could lead
to improved outcomes by allowing for early intervention.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jss.2018.03.028 
PMID: 29907209  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Neuropharmacology. 2019 Feb;145(Pt B):145-152. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.06.005. Epub 2018 Jun 7.

Secondary brain injury: Predicting and preventing insults.

Lazaridis C(1), Rusin CG(2), Robertson CS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurocritical Care, Department of Neurology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX, United States; Department of Neurosurgery, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, TX, United States. Electronic address: lazaridi@bcm.edu.
(2)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX,
United States.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, United
States. Electronic address: claudiar@bcm.edu.

Mortality or severe disability affects the majority of patients after severe
traumatic brain injury (TBI). Adherence to the brain trauma foundation guidelines
has overall improved outcomes; however, traditional as well as novel
interventions towards intracranial hypertension and secondary brain injury have
come under scrutiny after series of negative randomized controlled trials. In
fact, it would not be unfair to say there has been no single major breakthrough
in the management of severe TBI in the last two decades. One plausible hypothesis
for the aforementioned failures is that by the time treatment is initiated for
neuroprotection, or physiologic optimization, irreversible brain injury has
already set in. We, and others, have recently developed predictive models based
on machine learning from continuous time series of intracranial pressure and
partial brain tissue oxygenation. These models provide accurate predictions of
physiologic crises events in a timely fashion, offering the opportunity for an
earlier application of targeted interventions. In this article, we review the
rationale for prediction, discuss available predictive models with examples, and 
offer suggestions for their future prospective testing in conjunction with
preventive clinical algorithms. This article is part of the Special Issue
entitled "Novel Treatments for Traumatic Brain Injury".

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2018.06.005 
PMID: 29885419  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Acta Orthop. 2018 Aug;89(4):468-473. doi: 10.1080/17453674.2018.1453714. Epub
2018 Mar 26.

Automated detection and classification of the proximal humerus fracture by using 
deep learning algorithm.

Chung SW(1), Han SS(2), Lee JW(1), Oh KS(1), Kim NR(3), Yoon JP(4), Kim JY(5),
Moon SH(6), Kwon J(7), Lee HJ(8), Noh YM(9), Kim Y(10).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Orthopaedic Surgery and.
(2)b Department of Dermatology , I-dermatology clinic, Seoul.
(3)c Department of Radiology , Konkuk University School of Medicine , Seoul.
(4)d Department of Orthopaedic Surgery , Kyungpook National University College of
Medicine , Daegu , Korea.
(5)e Department of Orthopaedic Surgery , Myungji Hospital , Goyang.
(6)f Department of Orthopaedic Surgery , Kangwon National University College of
Medicine , Chuncheon , Korea.
(7)g Department of Othopaedic Surgery , National Police Hospital , Seoul.
(8)h Department of Orthopaedic Surgery , Catholic University College of Medicine,
Seoul, St Mary's Hospital , Seoul , Korea.
(9)i Department of Orthopaedic Surgery , Dong-A University College of Medicine , 
Pusan.
(10)j Center for Bionics, Korea Institute of Science and Technology , Seoul ,
Korea.

Background and purpose - We aimed to evaluate the ability of artificial
intelligence (a deep learning algorithm) to detect and classify proximal humerus 
fractures using plain anteroposterior shoulder radiographs. Patients and methods 
- 1,891 images (1 image per person) of normal shoulders (n = 515) and 4 proximal 
humerus fracture types (greater tuberosity, 346; surgical neck, 514; 3-part, 269;
4-part, 247) classified by 3 specialists were evaluated. We trained a deep
convolutional neural network (CNN) after augmentation of a training dataset. The 
ability of the CNN, as measured by top-1 accuracy, area under receiver operating 
characteristics curve (AUC), sensitivity/specificity, and Youden index, in
comparison with humans (28 general physicians, 11 general orthopedists, and 19
orthopedists specialized in the shoulder) to detect and classify proximal humerus
fractures was evaluated. Results - The CNN showed a high performance of 96% top-1
accuracy, 1.00 AUC, 0.99/0.97 sensitivity/specificity, and 0.97 Youden index for 
distinguishing normal shoulders from proximal humerus fractures. In addition, the
CNN showed promising results with 65-86% top-1 accuracy, 0.90-0.98 AUC,
0.88/0.83-0.97/0.94 sensitivity/specificity, and 0.71-0.90 Youden index for
classifying fracture type. When compared with the human groups, the CNN showed
superior performance to that of general physicians and orthopedists, similar
performance to orthopedists specialized in the shoulder, and the superior
performance of the CNN was more marked in complex 3- and 4-part fractures.
Interpretation - The use of artificial intelligence can accurately detect and
classify proximal humerus fractures on plain shoulder AP radiographs. Further
studies are necessary to determine the feasibility of applying artificial
intelligence in the clinic and whether its use could improve care and outcomes
compared with current orthopedic assessments.

DOI: 10.1080/17453674.2018.1453714 
PMCID: PMC6066766
PMID: 29577791  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Crit Care. 2018 Jun;45:156-162. doi: 10.1016/j.jcrc.2018.02.010. Epub 2018 Feb 
21.

Predicting central line-associated bloodstream infections and mortality using
supervised machine learning.

Parreco JP(1), Hidalgo AE(1), Badilla AD(2), Ilyas O(3), Rattan R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, USA.
(2)Division of Trauma Surgery and Surgical Critical Care, Department of Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, USA.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, USA.
(4)Division of Trauma Surgery and Surgical Critical Care, Department of Surgery, 
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, USA. Electronic address:
rrattan@miami.edu.

Comment in
    J Crit Care. 2018 Aug;46:162.
    J Crit Care. 2018 Aug;46:162-163.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to compare machine learning techniques for
predicting central line-associated bloodstream infection (CLABSI).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The Multiparameter Intelligent Monitoring in Intensive
Care III database was queried for all ICU admissions. The variables included six 
different severities of illness scores calculated on the first day of ICU
admission with their components and comorbidities. The outcomes of interest were 
in-hospital mortality, central line placement, and CLABSI. Predictive models were
created for these outcomes using classifiers with different algorithms: logistic 
regression, gradient boosted trees, and deep learning.
RESULTS: There were 57,786 total hospital admissions and the mortality rate was
10.1%. There were 38.4% patients with a central line and the rate of CLABSI was
1.5%. The classifiers using deep learning performed with the highest AUC for
mortality, 0.885±0.010 (p<0.01) and central line placement, 0.816±0.006 (p<0.01).
The classifier using logistic regression for predicting CLABSI performed with an 
AUC of 0.722±0.048 (p<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates models for identifying patients who will
develop CLABSI. Early identification of these patients has implications for
quality, cost, and outcome improvements.

Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jcrc.2018.02.010 
PMID: 29486341  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Phys Med. 2018 Jan;45:192-197. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmp.2017.10.008. Epub 2018 Jan 10.

Cochlea CT radiomics predicts chemoradiotherapy induced sensorineural hearing
loss in head and neck cancer patients: A machine learning and multi-variable
modelling study.

Abdollahi H(1), Mostafaei S(2), Cheraghi S(3), Shiri I(4), Rabi Mahdavi S(5),
Kazemnejad A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physics, School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran.
(3)Department of Radiation Sciences, Allied Medicine Faculty, Iran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Radiation Biology Research Center, Iran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(4)Research Center for Molecular and Cellular Imaging, Tehran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Department of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 
Rajaei Cardiovascular, Medical, Research Center, Iran University of Medical
Sciences, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Medical Physics, School of Medicine, Iran University of Medical 
Sciences, Tehran, Iran; Radiation Biology Research Center, Iran University of
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: mahdavi.r@iums.ac.ir.
(6)Department of Biostatistics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: kazem_an@modares.ac.ir.

OBJECTIVES: Immediately or after head-and-neck (H&N) cancer chemoradiotherapy
(CRT), patients may undergone significant sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) which
could affect their quality of life. Radiomic feature analysis is proposed to
predict SNHL induced by CRT.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 490 image features of 94 cochlea from 47 patients treated
with three dimensional conformal RT (3DCRT) for different H&N cancers were
extracted from CT images. Different machine learning (ML) algorithms and also
least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) penalized logistic
regression were implemented on radiomic features for feature selection,
classification and prediction. Also, LASSO penalized logistic model was used for 
outcome modelling.
RESULTS: The predictive power of ten ML methods was more than 70% (in accuracy,
precision and area under the curve of receiver operating characteristic curve
(AUC)). According to the LASSO penalized logistic modelling, 10 of the 490
radiomic features selected as the associated features with SNHL status. All of
the 10 features were statistically associated with SNHL (all of adjusted
P-values < .001).
CONCLUSION: CT radiomic analysis proposed in this study, could help in the
prediction of hearing loss induced by chemoradiation. Our study also,
demonstrates that combination of radiomic features with clinical and dosimetric
variables can model radiotherapy outcome such as SNHL.

Copyright © 2017 Associazione Italiana di Fisica Medica. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmp.2017.10.008 
PMID: 29329660  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2018 Jan 8;15(1). pii: E95. doi:
10.3390/ijerph15010095.

Predictors of a Change and Correlation in Activities of Daily Living after Hip
Fracture in Elderly Patients in a Community Hospital in Poland: A Six-Month
Prospective Cohort Study.

Ganczak M(1), Chrobrowski K(2), Korzeń M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Management, Faculty of Medical Sciences,
Pomeranian Medical University, Zolnierska 48, 71-210 Szczecin, Poland.
mganczak@pum.edu.pl.
(2)Orthopedic Surgery and Traumatology Ward, Multidisciplinary District Hospital,
Dekerta 1, 66-400 Gorzów Wlkp, Poland. krzysztofchrobrowski@me.com.
(3)Department of Methods of Artificial Intelligence and Applied Mathematics,
Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, West Pomeranian
University of Technology Szczecin, Zolnierska 46, 71-210 Szczecin, Poland.
mkorzen@wi.zut.edu.pl.

OBJECTIVES: The consequences of hip fractures (HFs) in elderly persons include a 
deterioration in functional capacity to perform activities that enable
independent living. Since prior research into this issue in Central Europe is
rather scant, this study sought to assess the change in activities and
instrumental activities of daily living (ADL/IADL) after HF surgery among Polish 
patients, to study predictors of regaining pre-fracture functional status three
and six months later, and to evaluate the correlation between ADL and IADL
limitations over time.
METHODS: A prospective study was conducted between 2011 and 2013 in a tertiary
hospital in Western Poland. ADL/IADL were evaluated using the Katz index and
Lawton scale, respectively.
RESULTS: About half (50.8%) of 120 patients (mean age 80.1 ± SD 7.59) had
cognitive impairment (CI). Patients with CI were older (p = 0.002) and had lower 
scores for pre-fracture ADL/IADL (p = 0.001 and p < 0.001, respectively). Six
months after HF, 33.3% of patients failed to return to their pre-fracture ADL and
62.5% failed to return to pre-fracture IADL; 20% of those who could walk before
HF were unable to walk after six months. The pre-fracture Spearman correlation
coefficient between ADL and IADL summary scores was 0.46; it increased to 0.70 at
three months after HF surgery and 0.77 at six months (p < 0.0001). Regaining ADL 
after six months was more likely in patients with pre-fracture intact
intellectual function and independence in pre-fracture ADL; regaining IADL, in
younger patients and those with higher pre-fracture IADL scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Impairment in functional performance is common after HF surgery. ADL
and IADL were strongly correlated in these patients, with this increasing over
time. Functional outcomes after HF were more dependent on patient characteristics
than treatment-related factors. Therefore, more emphasis should be directed
towards the pre-fracture period and, in particular, maintaining cognitive
function and preserving functional capacity in older persons at high risk of HF.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph15010095 
PMCID: PMC5800194
PMID: 29316721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


47. BMJ Open. 2018 Jan 5;8(1):e018252. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-018252.

Derivation and validation of different machine-learning models in mortality
prediction of trauma in motorcycle riders: a cross-sectional retrospective study 
in southern Taiwan.

Kuo PJ(1), Wu SC(2), Chien PC(1), Rau CS(3), Chen YC(1), Hsieh HY(1), Hsieh
CH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung,
Taiwan.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Kaohsiung Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang
Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to build and test the models of machine learning
(ML) to predict the mortality of hospitalised motorcycle riders.
SETTING: The study was conducted in a level-1 trauma centre in southern Taiwan.
PARTICIPANTS: Motorcycle riders who were hospitalised between January 2009 and
December 2015 were classified into a training set (n=6306) and test set (n=946). 
Using the demographic information, injury characteristics and laboratory data of 
patients, logistic regression (LR), support vector machine (SVM) and decision
tree (DT) analyses were performed to determine the mortality of individual
motorcycle riders, under different conditions, using all samples or reduced
samples, as well as all variables or selected features in the algorithm.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOME MEASURES: The predictive performance of the model
was evaluated based on accuracy, sensitivity, specificity and geometric mean, and
an analysis of the area under the receiver operating characteristic curves of the
two different models was carried out.
RESULTS: In the training set, both LR and SVM had a significantly higher area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) than DT. No significant
difference was observed in the AUC of LR and SVM, regardless of whether all
samples or reduced samples and whether all variables or selected features were
used. In the test set, the performance of the SVM model for all samples with
selected features was better than that of all other models, with an accuracy of
98.73%, sensitivity of 86.96%, specificity of 99.02%, geometric mean of 92.79%
and AUC of 0.9517, in mortality prediction.
CONCLUSION: ML can provide a feasible level of accuracy in predicting the
mortality of motorcycle riders. Integration of the ML model, particularly the SVM
algorithm in the trauma system, may help identify high-risk patients and,
therefore, guide appropriate interventions by the clinical staff.

© Article author(s) (or their employer(s) unless otherwise stated in the text of 
the article) 2018. All rights reserved. No commercial use is permitted unless
otherwise expressly granted.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2017-018252 
PMCID: PMC5781097
PMID: 29306885  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


48. Artif Intell Med. 2018 Jan;84:139-145. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2017.12.003. Epub
2017 Dec 21.

Bayesian averaging over Decision Tree models for trauma severity scoring.

Schetinin V(1), Jakaite L(2), Krzanowski W(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Bedfordshire, United Kingdom. Electronic address:
v.schetinin@beds.ac.uk.
(2)University of Bedfordshire, United Kingdom.
(3)University of Exeter, United Kingdom.

Health care practitioners analyse possible risks of misleading decisions and need
to estimate and quantify uncertainty in predictions. We have examined the "gold" 
standard of screening a patient's conditions for predicting survival probability,
based on logistic regression modelling, which is used in trauma care for clinical
purposes and quality audit. This methodology is based on theoretical assumptions 
about data and uncertainties. Models induced within such an approach have exposed
a number of problems, providing unexplained fluctuation of predicted survival and
low accuracy of estimating uncertainty intervals within which predictions are
made. Bayesian method, which in theory is capable of providing accurate
predictions and uncertainty estimates, has been adopted in our study using
Decision Tree models. Our approach has been tested on a large set of patients
registered in the US National Trauma Data Bank and has outperformed the standard 
method in terms of prediction accuracy, thereby providing practitioners with
accurate estimates of the predictive posterior densities of interest that are
required for making risk-aware decisions.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artmed.2017.12.003 
PMID: 29275896  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2018 May;50(5):906-914. doi: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000001527.

Predictive Modeling of Hamstring Strain Injuries in Elite Australian Footballers.

Ruddy JD(1), Shield AJ(1), Maniar N(1), Williams MD(1), Duhig S(1), Timmins
RG(1), Hickey J(1), Bourne MN(1), Opar DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Exercise Science, Australian Catholic University, Melbourne,
AUSTRALIA.

Comment in
    Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2018 Dec;50(12):2614.
    Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2018 Dec;50(12):2615-2616.

PURPOSE: Three of the most commonly identified hamstring strain injury (HSI) risk
factors are age, previous HSI, and low levels of eccentric hamstring strength.
However, no study has investigated the ability of these risk factors to predict
the incidence of HSI in elite Australian footballers. Accordingly, the purpose of
this prospective cohort study was to investigate the predictive ability of HSI
risk factors using machine learning techniques.
METHODS: Eccentric hamstring strength, demographic and injury history data were
collected at the start of preseason for 186 and 176 elite Australian footballers 
in 2013 and 2015, respectively. Any prospectively occurring HSI were reported to 
the research team. Using various machine learning techniques, predictive models
were built for 2013 and 2015 within-year HSI prediction and between-year HSI
prediction (2013 to 2015). The calculated probabilities of HSI were compared with
the injury outcomes and area under the curve (AUC) was determined and used to
assess the predictive performance of each model.
RESULTS: The minimum, maximum, and median AUC values for the 2013 models were
0.26, 0.91, and 0.58, respectively. For the 2015 models, the minimum, maximum and
median AUC values were, correspondingly, 0.24, 0.92, and 0.57. For the
between-year predictive models the minimum, maximum, and median AUC values were
0.37, 0.73, and 0.52, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Although some iterations of the models achieved near perfect
prediction, the large ranges in AUC highlight the fragility of the data. The 2013
models performed slightly better than the 2015 models. The predictive performance
of between-year HSI models was poor however. In conclusion, risk factor data
cannot be used to identify athletes at an increased risk of HSI with any
consistency.

DOI: 10.1249/MSS.0000000000001527 
PMID: 29266094  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Aust Endod J. 2018 Dec;44(3):286-291. doi: 10.1111/aej.12240. Epub 2017 Dec 11.

Diagnosis of vertical root fractures in endodontically treated teeth utilising
Digital Subtraction Radiography: A case series report.

Mikrogeorgis G(1), Eirinaki E(2), Kapralos V(1), Koutroulis A(1), Lyroudia K(1), 
Pitas I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endodontology, School of Dentistry, Aristotle University of
Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.
(2)Department of Endodontics, Faculty of Dentistry, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
(3)Artificial Intelligence and Information Analysis Laboratory, School of
Informatics, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.

Vertical root fractures are commonly associated with root-filled teeth. Diagnosis
is challenging because the clinical signs are not completely pathognomonic, and
conventional periapical radiography is often unreliable. Digital subtraction
radiography (DSR) is able to detect small radiographic changes between two
successive radiographs by subtracting out consistent radiographic elements. Its
use could possibly assist in the diagnostic procedure. Four cases are presented
to demonstrate the potential use of DSR in the detection of vertical root
fractures in endodontically treated teeth. After the digital subtractions had
been carried out, a dark line in the body of the roots was distinguishable,
raising the possibility of the presence of a vertical root fracture. The use of
contrast enhancement and pseudocolouring techniques assisted with the diagnosis
of vertical root fractures. DSR proved to be a useful diagnostic tool for the
detection of vertical root fractures in these four clinical cases.

© 2017 Australian Society of Endodontology Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/aej.12240 
PMID: 29226512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. JAMA Psychiatry. 2018 Feb 1;75(2):201-209. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.3951.

Transdiagnostic Symptom Clusters and Associations With Brain, Behavior, and Daily
Function in Mood, Anxiety, and Trauma Disorders.

Grisanzio KA(1)(2), Goldstein-Piekarski AN(1)(2), Wang MY(3), Rashed Ahmed AP(4),
Samara Z(1)(2), Williams LM(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University,
Stanford, California.
(2)Sierra-Pacific Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center,
Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, California.
(3)Brain Resource International Database, Brain Resource Ltd, Woolloomooloo,
Sydney, Australia.
(4)SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, California.

Erratum in
    JAMA Psychiatry. 2018 Feb 1;75(2):215.
    JAMA Psychiatry. 2018 Dec 1;75(12):1304.

Importance: The symptoms that define mood, anxiety, and trauma disorders are
highly overlapping across disorders and heterogeneous within disorders. It is
unknown whether coherent subtypes exist that span multiple diagnoses and are
expressed functionally (in underlying cognition and brain function) and
clinically (in daily function). The identification of cohesive subtypes would
help disentangle the symptom overlap in our current diagnoses and serve as a tool
for tailoring treatment choices.
Objective: To propose and demonstrate 1 approach for identifying subtypes within 
a transdiagnostic sample.
Design, Setting, and Participants: This cross-sectional study analyzed data from 
the Brain Research and Integrative Neuroscience Network Foundation Database that 
had been collected at the University of Sydney and University of Adelaide between
2006 and 2010 and replicated at Stanford University between 2013 and 2017. The
study included 420 individuals with a primary diagnosis of major depressive
disorder (n = 100), panic disorder (n = 53), posttraumatic stress disorder
(n = 47), or no disorder (healthy control participants) (n = 220). Data were
analyzed between October 2016 and October 2017.
Main Outcomes and Measures: We followed a data-driven approach to achieve the
primary study outcome of identifying transdiagnostic subtypes. First, machine
learning with a hierarchical clustering algorithm was implemented to classify
participants based on self-reported negative mood, anxiety, and stress symptoms. 
Second, the robustness and generalizability of the subtypes were tested in an
independent sample. Third, we assessed whether symptom subtypes were expressed at
behavioral and physiological levels of functioning. Fourth, we evaluated the
clinically meaningful differences in functional capacity of the subtypes.
Findings were interpreted relative to a complementary diagnostic frame of
reference.
Results: Four hundred twenty participants with a mean (SD) age of 39.8 (14.1)
years were included in the final analysis; 256 (61.0%) were female. We identified
6 distinct subtypes characterized by tension (n=81; 19%), anxious arousal (n=55; 
13%), general anxiety (n=38; 9%), anhedonia (n=29; 7%), melancholia (n=37; 9%),
and normative mood (n=180; 43%), and these subtypes were replicated in an
independent sample. Subtypes were expressed through differences in cognitive
control (F5,383 = 5.13, P < .001, ηp2 = 0.063), working memory (F5,401 = 3.29,
P = .006, ηp2 = 0.039), electroencephalography-recorded β power in a resting
paradigm (F5,357 = 3.84, P = .002, ηp2 = 0.051), electroencephalography-recorded 
β power in an emotional paradigm (F5,365 = 3.56, P = .004, ηp2 = 0.047), social
functional capacity (F5,414 = 21.33, P < .001, ηp2 = 0.205), and emotional
resilience (F5,376 = 15.10, P < .001, ηp2 = 0.171).
Conclusions and Relevance: These findings offer a data-driven framework for
identifying robust subtypes that signify specific, coherent, meaningful
associations between symptoms, behavior, brain function, and observable
real-world function, and that cut across DSM-IV-defined diagnoses of major
depressive disorder, panic disorder, and posttraumatic stress disorder.

DOI: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.3951 
PMCID: PMC5838569
PMID: 29197929 


52. Brain. 2018 Jan 1;141(1):48-54. doi: 10.1093/brain/awx288.

High-dimensional therapeutic inference in the focally damaged human brain.

Xu T(1), Rolf Jäger H(1), Husain M(2)(3), Rees G(1)(3)(4)(5), Nachev P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurology, UCL, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.
(2)Department of Clinical Neurology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
(3)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, UCL, London WC1N 3AR, UK.
(4)Faculty of Life Sciences, UCL, London, WC1E 6BT, UK.
(5)Wellcome Trust Centre for Neuroimaging, UCL, London WC1N 3BG, UK.

Comment in
    Brain. 2018 Jan 1;141(1):2-4.

See Thiebaut de Schotten and Foulon (doi:10.1093/brain/awx332) for a scientific
commentary on this article.Though consistency across the population renders the
extraordinarily complex functional anatomy of the human brain surveyable, the
inverse inference-from common functional maps to individual behaviour-is
constrained by marked individual deviation from the population mean. Such
inference is fundamental to the evaluation of therapeutic interventions in focal 
brain injury, where the impact of an induced structural change in the brain is
quantified by its behavioural consequences, inevitably refracted through the lens
of lesion-outcome relations. Current therapeutic evaluations do not incorporate
inferences to the individual outcome derived from a detailed specification of the
lesion anatomy, relying only on reductive parameters such as lesion volume and
crudely discretised location. Examining 1172 patients with anatomically
registered focal brain lesions, here we show that such low-dimensional models are
highly insensitive to therapeutic effects. In contrast, high-dimensional models
supported by machine learning dramatically improve sensitivity by leveraging
complex individuating patterns in the functional architecture of the brain. The
failure to replicate in humans positive interventional effects in experimental
animals is thus revealed to have a remediable inferential cause, forcing a
radical re-evaluation of therapeutic inference in the human brain.

© The Author (2017). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awx288 
PMCID: PMC5837627
PMID: 29149245  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2017 Oct 11;5(10):e151. doi: 10.2196/mhealth.8201.

Fall Detection in Individuals With Lower Limb Amputations Using Mobile Phones:
Machine Learning Enhances Robustness for Real-World Applications.

Shawen N(#)(1)(2), Lonini L(#)(1)(2)(3), Mummidisetty CK(1), Shparii I(1)(2)(4), 
Albert MV(1)(2)(3)(4), Kording K(5)(6), Jayaraman A(1)(2)(3)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Max Nader Lab for Rehabilitation Technologies and Outcomes Research, Shirley
Ryan AbilityLab, Chicago, IL, United States.
(2)Center for Bionic Medicine, Shirley Ryan AbilityLab, Chicago, IL, United
States.
(3)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Northwestern University,
Chicago, IL, United States.
(4)Department of Computer Science, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, IL, United
States.
(5)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
United States.
(6)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
United States.
(7)Department of Physical Therapy and Human Movement Sciences, Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL, United States.
(#)Contributed equally

Erratum in
    JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 2017 Dec 20;5(12 ):e167.

BACKGROUND: Automatically detecting falls with mobile phones provides an
opportunity for rapid response to injuries and better knowledge of what
precipitated the fall and its consequences. This is beneficial for populations
that are prone to falling, such as people with lower limb amputations. Prior
studies have focused on fall detection in able-bodied individuals using data from
a laboratory setting. Such approaches may provide a limited ability to detect
falls in amputees and in real-world scenarios.
OBJECTIVE: The aim was to develop a classifier that uses data from able-bodied
individuals to detect falls in individuals with a lower limb amputation, while
they freely carry the mobile phone in different locations and during free-living.
METHODS: We obtained 861 simulated indoor and outdoor falls from 10 young control
(non-amputee) individuals and 6 individuals with a lower limb amputation. In
addition, we recorded a broad database of activities of daily living, including
data from three participants' free-living routines. Sensor readings
(accelerometer and gyroscope) from a mobile phone were recorded as participants
freely carried it in three common locations-on the waist, in a pocket, and in the
hand. A set of 40 features were computed from the sensors data and four
classifiers were trained and combined through stacking to detect falls. We
compared the performance of two population-specific models, trained and tested on
either able-bodied or amputee participants, with that of a model trained on
able-bodied participants and tested on amputees. A simple threshold-based
classifier was used to benchmark our machine-learning classifier.
RESULTS: The accuracy of fall detection in amputees for a model trained on
control individuals (sensitivity: mean 0.989, 1.96*standard error of the mean
[SEM] 0.017; specificity: mean 0.968, SEM 0.025) was not statistically different 
(P=.69) from that of a model trained on the amputee population (sensitivity: mean
0.984, SEM 0.016; specificity: mean 0.965, SEM 0.022). Detection of falls in
control individuals yielded similar results (sensitivity: mean 0.979, SEM 0.022; 
specificity: mean 0.991, SEM 0.012). A mean 2.2 (SD 1.7) false alarms per day
were obtained when evaluating the model (vs mean 122.1, SD 166.1 based on
thresholds) on data recorded as participants carried the phone during their daily
routine for two or more days. Machine-learning classifiers outperformed the
threshold-based one (P<.001).
CONCLUSIONS: A mobile phone-based fall detection model can use data from
non-amputee individuals to detect falls in individuals walking with a prosthesis.
We successfully detected falls when the mobile phone was carried across multiple 
locations and without a predetermined orientation. Furthermore, the number of
false alarms yielded by the model over a longer period of time was reasonably
low. This moves the application of mobile phone-based fall detection systems
closer to a real-world use case scenario.

©Nicholas Shawen, Luca Lonini, Chaithanya Krishna Mummidisetty, Ilona Shparii,
Mark V Albert, Konrad Kording, Arun Jayaraman. Originally published in JMIR
Mhealth and Uhealth (http://mhealth.jmir.org), 11.10.2017.

DOI: 10.2196/mhealth.8201 
PMCID: PMC5656773
PMID: 29021127 


54. J Neurosurg Anesthesiol. 2018 Oct;30(4):347-353. doi:
10.1097/ANA.0000000000000462.

Hemodynamic Instability and Cardiovascular Events After Traumatic Brain Injury
Predict Outcome After Artifact Removal With Deep Belief Network Analysis.

Kim H(1), Lee SB(1), Son Y(2), Czosnyka M(3), Kim DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University.
(2)Department of Computer Engineering, Dongguk University, Seoul, South Korea.
(3)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Division of Neurosurgery, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

BACKGROUND: Hemodynamic instability and cardiovascular events heavily affect the 
prognosis of traumatic brain injury. Physiological signals are monitored to
detect these events. However, the signals are often riddled with faulty readings,
which jeopardize the reliability of the clinical parameters obtained from the
signals. A machine-learning model for the elimination of artifactual events shows
promising results for improving signal quality. However, the actual impact of the
improvements on the performance of the clinical parameters after the elimination 
of the artifacts is not well studied.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The arterial blood pressure of 99 subjects with traumatic 
brain injury was continuously measured for 5 consecutive days, beginning on the
day of admission. The machine-learning deep belief network was constructed to
automatically identify and remove false incidences of hypotension, hypertension, 
bradycardia, tachycardia, and alterations in cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP).
RESULTS: The prevalences of hypotension and tachycardia were significantly
reduced by 47.5% and 13.1%, respectively, after suppressing false incidents
(P=0.01). Hypotension was particularly effective at predicting outcome
favorability and mortality after artifact elimination (P=0.015 and 0.027,
respectively). In addition, increased CPP was also statistically significant in
predicting outcomes (P=0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of false incidents due to signal artifacts can be
significantly reduced using machine-learning. Some clinical events, such as
hypotension and alterations in CPP, gain particularly high predictive capacity
for patient outcomes after artifacts are eliminated from physiological signals.

DOI: 10.1097/ANA.0000000000000462 
PMID: 28991060  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. eNeuro. 2017 Sep 13;4(5). pii: ENEURO.0164-17.2017. doi:
10.1523/ENEURO.0164-17.2017. eCollection 2017 Sep-Oct.

Defining an Analytic Framework to Evaluate Quantitative MRI Markers of Traumatic 
Axonal Injury: Preliminary Results in a Mouse Closed Head Injury Model.

Haber M(1), Hutchinson EB(2)(3)(4), Sadeghi N(2)(3), Cheng WH(5), Namjoshi D(5), 
Cripton P(6), Irfanoglu MO(2), Wellington C(5), Diaz-Arrastia R(1), Pierpaoli
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA.
(2)Quantitative Medical Imaging Section, National Institute of Biomedical Imaging
and Bioengineering, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.
(3)Section on Quantitative Imaging and Tissue Sciences, Eunice Kennedy Shriver
National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD.
(4)The Henry M. Jackson Foundation for the Advancement of Military Medicine, Inc,
Bethesda, MD.
(5)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Djavad Mowafaghian Centre for Brain Health,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(6)Mechanical Engineering, International Collaboration on Repair Discoveries,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Diffuse axonal injury (DAI) is a hallmark of traumatic brain injury (TBI)
pathology. Recently, the Closed Head Injury Model of Engineered Rotational
Acceleration (CHIMERA) was developed to generate an experimental model of DAI in 
a mouse. The characterization of DAI using diffusion tensor magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI; diffusion tensor imaging, DTI) may provide a useful set of outcome 
measures for preclinical and clinical studies. The objective of this study was to
identify the complex neurobiological underpinnings of DTI features following DAI 
using a comprehensive and quantitative evaluation of DTI and histopathology in
the CHIMERA mouse model. A consistent neuroanatomical pattern of pathology in
specific white matter tracts was identified across ex vivo DTI maps and
photomicrographs of histology. These observations were confirmed by voxelwise and
regional analysis of DTI maps, demonstrating reduced fractional anisotropy (FA)
in distinct regions such as the optic tract. Similar regions were identified by
quantitative histology and exhibited axonal damage as well as robust gliosis.
Additional analysis using a machine-learning algorithm was performed to identify 
regions and metrics important for injury classification in a manner free from
potential user bias. This analysis found that diffusion metrics were able to
identify injured brains almost with the same degree of accuracy as the histology 
metrics. Good agreement between regions detected as abnormal by histology and MRI
was also found. The findings of this work elucidate the complexity of cellular
changes that give rise to imaging abnormalities and provide a comprehensive and
quantitative evaluation of the relative importance of DTI and histological
measures to detect brain injury.

DOI: 10.1523/ENEURO.0164-17.2017 
PMCID: PMC5616192
PMID: 28966972  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Psychiatr Res. 2018 Jan;96:15-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2017.09.010. Epub
2017 Sep 8.

Predicting posttraumatic stress disorder following a natural disaster.

Rosellini AJ(1), Dussaillant F(2), Zubizarreta JR(3), Kessler RC(4), Rose S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA;
Center for Anxiety and Related Disorders, Boston University, Boston, MA, USA.
Electronic address: ajrosellini@gmail.com.
(2)School of Government, University of Desarrollo, Santiago, Chile.
(3)Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA;
Division of Decision, Risk and Operations, and Department of Statistics, Columbia
University, New York, NY, USA.
(4)Department of Health Care Policy, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Earthquakes are a common and deadly natural disaster, with roughly one-quarter of
survivors subsequently developing posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). Despite
progress identifying risk factors, limited research has examined how to combine
variables into an optimized post-earthquake PTSD prediction tool that could be
used to triage survivors to mental health services. The current study developed a
post-earthquake PTSD risk score using machine learning methods designed to
optimize prediction. The data were from a two-wave survey of Chileans exposed to 
the 8.8 magnitude earthquake that occurred in February 2010. Respondents
(n = 23,907) were interviewed roughly three months prior to and again three
months after the earthquake. Probable post-earthquake PTSD was assessed using the
Davidson Trauma Scale. We applied super learning, an ensembling machine learning 
method, to develop the PTSD risk score from 67 risk factors that could be
assessed within one week of earthquake occurrence. The super learner algorithm
had better cross-validated performance than the 39 individual algorithms from
which it was developed, including conventional logistic regression. The super
learner also had a better area under the receiver operating characteristic curve 
(0.79) than existing post-disaster PTSD risk tools. Individuals in the top 5%,
10%, and 20% of the predicted risk distribution accounted for 17.5%, 32.2%, and
51.4% of all probable cases of PTSD, respectively. In addition to developing a
risk score that could be implemented in the near future, these results more
broadly support the utility of super learning to develop optimized prediction
functions for mental health outcomes.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2017.09.010 
PMCID: PMC5726547
PMID: 28950110  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. BMC Infect Dis. 2017 Jul 25;17(1):515. doi: 10.1186/s12879-017-2607-2.

A cross-sectional sero-survey on preoperative HBV vaccination policy in Poland.

Ganczak M(1), Korzen M(2), Jurewicz A(3), Szych Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Management, Pomeranian Medical University,
Zolnierska 48, 71-210, Szczecin, Poland. mganczak@pum.edu.pl.
(2)Department of Methods of Artificial Intelligence and Applied Mathematics, West
Pomeranian University of Technology, Zolnierska 49, 71-210, Szczecin, Poland.
(3)Department of Orthopedic and Trauma, Pomeranian Medical University, Unii
Lubelskiej 1, 71-210, Szczecin, Poland.
(4)Department of Computer Science and Education Quality Research, Pomeranian
Medical University, Zolnierska 53, 71-210, Szczecin, Poland.

BACKGROUND: A two-dose preoperative vaccination schedule against HBV has been the
widely accepted policy in Poland. However, its effectiveness has not yet been
assessed.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate a two-dose preoperative HBV vaccination policy by an
assessment of the proportion of patients who don't present a protective level of 
anti-HBs (<10.0 mIU/ml).
METHODS: Consecutive patients from surgical/gynecologic wards of 12 randomly
selected hospitals in West Pomerania, Poland, hospitalized between 2010 and 2013,
vaccinated against HBV with a two-dose regimen, were asked to complete an
anonymous questionnaire. Serum samples were assayed for anti-HBs with the use of 
third-generation testing methods. To compare sensitivity versus specificity
across a range of values for the ability to predict a dichotomous outcome (a
protection against HBV infection) a Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve
was determined.
RESULTS: There were 193 patients, 58.5% women, median age 52 years. Almost a half
(46.0%) of the patients were operated on within 0-60 days of taking the second
vaccine dose, 16.2% - 61-180 days after, 37.8% >180 days after. Anti-HBs titer
was below a protective level in 49.2% of participants (0.0 mIU/ml in 17.8%,
0.1-9.9 mIU/ml in 31.4%); none of them were aware of this fact. Age ≤ 52 years
(OR = 1.89) and having surgery more than 37.5 days after HBV vaccination
(OR = 2.70) were associated with greater odds of being protected against HBV
infection through vaccination. For the time frame between the second dose
implementation and surgery 23 days, a sensitivity of 84% and specificity of 22%
for obtaining protection against HBV infection was found, for the time frame
>37.5 days - sensitivity remained high (80%), while specificity increased (41%); 
there was an apparent peek on the ROC curve between 38 and 60 day. In the group
vaccinated 0-37.5 days before surgery, less patients had the protective level of 
anti-HBs titer than in vaccinated 38-60 days before surgery (32.3% vs 60.0%;
p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: The success rate in achieving adequate immune protection with two
dose HBV vaccination schedule in preoperatively vaccinated patients is relatively
low, especially among those vaccinated less than five weeks prior to surgery. In 
more than a third of cases the standard three-dose regimen could have been
implemented, as participants had time to complete a third dose. Current
recommendations regarding a preoperative policy with a 2-dose vaccination
schedule in Poland should be revised; the best time to perform surgery after the 
implementation of the second dose of vaccine in the context of patient protection
against HBV infection would be between 38 and 60 days.

DOI: 10.1186/s12879-017-2607-2 
PMCID: PMC5526288
PMID: 28743234  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Neurotrauma. 2018 Jan 1;35(1):118-129. doi: 10.1089/neu.2017.5104. Epub 2017
Aug 18.

Transcriptional Changes in the Mouse Retina after Ocular Blast Injury: A Role for
the Immune System.

Struebing FL(1), King R(1), Li Y(1), Chrenek MA(1), Lyuboslavsky PN(1), Sidhu
CS(1), Iuvone PM(1), Geisert EE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Emory University , Atlanta, Georgia .

Ocular blast injury is a major medical concern for soldiers and explosion victims
due to poor visual outcomes. To define the changes in gene expression following a
blast injury to the eye, we examined retinal ribonucleic acid (RNA) expression in
54 mouse strains 5 days after a single 50-psi overpressure air wave blast injury.
We observe that almost 40% of genes are differentially expressed with a false
discovery rate (FDR) of <0.001, even though the nominal changes in RNA expression
are rather small. Moreover, we find through machine learning approaches that
genetic networks related to the innate and acquired immune system are activated. 
Accompanied by lymphocyte invasion into the inner retina, blast injury also
results in progressive loss of visual function and retinal ganglion cells (RGCs).
Collectively, these data demonstrate how systems genetics can be used to put
meaning to the transcriptome changes following ocular blast injury that
eventually lead to blindness.

DOI: 10.1089/neu.2017.5104 
PMCID: PMC5757081
PMID: 28599600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2017 Oct;83(4):609-616. doi:
10.1097/TA.0000000000001596.

Towards precision medicine: Accurate predictive modeling of infectious
complications in combat casualties.

Dente CJ(1), Bradley M, Schobel S, Gaucher B, Buchman T, Kirk AD, Elster E.

Author information: 
(1)From the Emory University (C.J.D., T.B.), Atlanta, Georgia; Grady Memorial
Hospital (C.J.D.), Atlanta, Georgia; Uniformed Services University of the Health 
Sciences (M.B., S.S., B.G., E.E.), Bethesda, Maryland; Walter Reed National
Military Medical Center (M.B., E.E.), Bethesda, Maryland; Surgical Critical Care 
Initiative (SC2i) (C.J.D., M.B., S.S., B.G., T.B., A.D.K., E.E.), Bethesda,
Maryland; and Duke University (A.D.K.), Durham, North Carolina.

BACKGROUND: The biomarker profile of trauma patients may allow for the creation
of models to assist bedside decision making and prediction of complications. We
sought to determine the utility of modeling in the prediction of bacteremia and
pneumonia in combat casualties.
METHODS: This is a prospective, observational trial of patients with complex
wounds treated at Walter Reed National Military Medical Center (2007-2012).
Tissue, serum, and wound effluent samples were collected during operative
interventions until wound closure. Clinical, biomarker, and outcome data were
used in machine learning algorithms to develop models predicting bacteremia or
pneumonia. Modeling was performed on the first operative washout to maximize
predictive benefit. Variable selection of dataset variables was performed and the
best-fitting Bayesian belief network (BBN), using Bayesian information criterion 
(BIC), was selected for predictive modeling. Random forest was performed using
variables from BBN step. Model performance was evaluated using area under the
receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) analysis.
RESULTS: Seventy-three patients (mean age 23, mean Injury Severity Score 25) were
enrolled. Patients required a median of 3 (2-13) operations. The incidence of
bacteremia and pneumonia was 22% and 12%, respectively. Best-fitting variable
selected BBNs were maximum-minimum parents and children (MMPC) for both
bacteremia (BIC-24948) and pneumonia (BIC-17886). Full variable and MMPC random
forest models AUC were 0.721 and 0.834, respectively, for bacteremia and 0.809
and 0.856, respectively, for pneumonia.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified a profile predictive of bacteremia and pneumonia in
combat casualties. This has important clinical implications and should be
validated in the civilian trauma population. This and similar tools will allow
for increasing precision in the management of critically ill and injured
patients.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Prognostic, level III.

DOI: 10.1097/TA.0000000000001596 
PMID: 28538622  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Shock. 2017 Nov;48(5):504-510. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000000898.

Machine Learning for Predicting Outcomes in Trauma.

Liu NT(1), Salinas J.

Author information: 
(1)US Army Institute of Surgical Research, JBSA Fort Sam Houston, Texas.

To date, there are no reviews on machine learning (ML) for predicting outcomes in
trauma. Consequently, it remains unclear as to how ML-based prediction models
compare in the triage and assessment of trauma patients. The objective of this
review was to survey and identify studies involving ML for predicting outcomes in
trauma, with the hypothesis that models predicting similar outcomes may share
common features but the performance of ML in these studies will differ greatly.
MEDLINE and other databases were searched for studies involving trauma and ML.
Sixty-five observational studies involving ML for the prediction of trauma
outcomes met inclusion criteria. In total 2,433,180 patients were included in the
studies. The studies focused on prediction of the following outcome measures:
survival/mortality (n = 34), morbidity/shock/hemorrhage (n = 12), hospital length
of stay (n = 7), hospital admission/triage (n = 6), traumatic brain injury
(n = 4), life-saving interventions (n = 5), post-traumatic stress disorder
(n = 4), and transfusion (n = 1). Six studies were prospective observational
studies. Of the 65 studies, 33 used artificial neural networks for prediction.
Importantly, most studies demonstrated the benefits of ML models. However,
algorithm performance was assessed differently by different authors.
Sensitivity-specificity gap values varied greatly from 0.035 to 0.927. Notably,
studies shared many features for model development. A common ML feature base may 
be determined for predicting outcomes in trauma. However, the impact of ML will
require further validation in prospective observational studies and randomized
clinical trials, establishment of common performance criteria, and high-quality
evidence about clinical and economic impacts before ML can be widely accepted in 
practice.

DOI: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000000898 
PMID: 28498299  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Ann Intern Med. 2017 Jun 6;166(11):818-839. doi: 10.7326/M15-1361. Epub 2017 May 
9.

Treatment of Low Bone Density or Osteoporosis to Prevent Fractures in Men and
Women: A Clinical Practice Guideline Update From the American College of
Physicians.

Qaseem A(1), Forciea MA(1), McLean RM(1), Denberg TD(1); Clinical Guidelines
Committee of the American College of Physicians.

Author information: 
(1)From the American College of Physicians and University of Pennsylvania Health 
System, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut.

Erratum in
    Ann Intern Med. 2017 Sep 19;167(6):448.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2017 Jun 6;166(11):852-853.
    Arthritis Rheumatol. 2017 Nov;69(11):2097-2101.
    Ann Intern Med. 2017 Dec 19;167(12):899-900.
    Ann Intern Med. 2017 Dec 19;167(12):900.
    Ann Intern Med. 2017 Dec 19;167(12):902.
    Ann Intern Med. 2017 Dec 19;167(12):900-901.
    Ann Intern Med. 2017 Dec 19;167(12):903-904.
    Ann Intern Med. 2017 Dec 19;167(12):901.
    Ann Intern Med. 2017 Dec 19;167(12):899.
    Ann Intern Med. 2017 Dec 19;167(12):904.

Summary for patients in
    Ann Intern Med. 2017 Jun 6;166(11):.

Description: This guideline updates the 2008 American College of Physicians (ACP)
recommendations on treatment of low bone density and osteoporosis to prevent
fractures in men and women. This guideline is endorsed by the American Academy of
Family Physicians.
Methods: The ACP Clinical Guidelines Committee based these recommendations on a
systematic review of randomized controlled trials; systematic reviews; large
observational studies (for adverse events); and case reports (for rare events)
that were published between 2 January 2005 and 3 June 2011. The review was
updated to July 2016 by using a machine-learning method, and a limited update to 
October 2016 was done. Clinical outcomes evaluated were fractures and adverse
events. This guideline focuses on the comparative benefits and risks of short-
and long-term pharmacologic treatments for low bone density, including
pharmaceutical prescriptions, calcium, vitamin D, and estrogen. Evidence was
graded according to the GRADE (Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development
and Evaluation) system.
Target Audience and Patient Population: The target audience for this guideline
includes all clinicians. The target patient population includes men and women
with low bone density and osteoporosis.
Recommendation 1: ACP recommends that clinicians offer pharmacologic treatment
with alendronate, risedronate, zoledronic acid, or denosumab to reduce the risk
for hip and vertebral fractures in women who have known osteoporosis. (Grade:
strong recommendation; high-quality evidence).
Recommendation 2: ACP recommends that clinicians treat osteoporotic women with
pharmacologic therapy for 5 years. (Grade: weak recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
Recommendation 3: ACP recommends that clinicians offer pharmacologic treatment
with bisphosphonates to reduce the risk for vertebral fracture in men who have
clinically recognized osteoporosis. (Grade: weak recommendation; low-quality
evidence).
Recommendation 4: ACP recommends against bone density monitoring during the
5-year pharmacologic treatment period for osteoporosis in women. (Grade: weak
recommendation; low-quality evidence).
Recommendation 5: ACP recommends against using menopausal estrogen therapy or
menopausal estrogen plus progestogen therapy or raloxifene for the treatment of
osteoporosis in women. (Grade: strong recommendation; moderate-quality evidence).
Recommendation 6: ACP recommends that clinicians should make the decision whether
to treat osteopenic women 65 years of age or older who are at a high risk for
fracture based on a discussion of patient preferences, fracture risk profile, and
benefits, harms, and costs of medications. (Grade: weak recommendation;
low-quality evidence).

DOI: 10.7326/M15-1361 
PMID: 28492856  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Artif Intell Med. 2017 Sep;81:41-53. doi: 10.1016/j.artmed.2017.03.004. Epub 2017
Mar 18.

Early prediction of radiotherapy-induced parotid shrinkage and toxicity based on 
CT radiomics and fuzzy classification.

Pota M(1), Scalco E(2), Sanguineti G(3), Farneti A(3), Cattaneo GM(4), Rizzo
G(2), Esposito M(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Research Council of Italy - Institute for High Performance Computing 
and Networking (ICAR), Via P. Castellino 111, 80131 Naples, Italy. Electronic
address: marco.pota@na.icar.cnr.it.
(2)National Research Council of Italy - Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and
Physiology (IBFM), Via F.lli Cervi 93, 20090 Segrate, MI, Italy.
(3)Radiotherapy, Istituto Nazionale Tumori Regina Elena, Roma, Italy.
(4)Medical Physics Department, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milano, Italy.
(5)National Research Council of Italy - Institute for High Performance Computing 
and Networking (ICAR), Via P. Castellino 111, 80131 Naples, Italy.

Comment in
    Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2018 Jan 1;100(1):1-4.

MOTIVATION: Patients under radiotherapy for head-and-neck cancer often suffer of 
long-term xerostomia, and/or consistent shrinkage of parotid glands. In order to 
avoid these drawbacks, adaptive therapy can be planned for patients at risk, if
the prediction is obtained timely, before or during the early phase of treatment.
Artificial intelligence can address the problem, by learning from examples and
building classification models. In particular, fuzzy logic has shown its
suitability for medical applications, in order to manage uncertain data, and to
build transparent rule-based classifiers. In previous works, clinical, dosimetric
and image-based features were considered separately, to find different possible
predictors of parotid shrinkage. On the other hand, a few works reported possible
image-based predictors of xerostomia, while the combination of different types of
features has been little addressed.
OBJECTIVE: This paper proposes the application of a novel machine learning
approach, based on both statistics and fuzzy logic, aimed at the classification
of patients at risk of i) parotid gland shrinkage and ii) 12-months xerostomia.
Both problems are addressed with the aim of individuating predictors and models
to classify respective outcomes.
METHODS: Knowledge is extracted from a real dataset of radiotherapy patients, by 
means of a recently developed method named Likelihood-Fuzzy Analysis, based on
the representation of statistical information by fuzzy rule-based models. This
method enables to manage heterogeneous variables and missing data, and to obtain 
interpretable fuzzy models presenting good generalization power (thus high
performance), and to measure classification confidence. Numerous features are
extracted to characterize patients, coming from different sources, i.e. clinical 
features, dosimetric parameters, and radiomics-based measures obtained by texture
analysis of Computed Tomography images. A learning approach based on the
composition of simple models in a more complicated one allows to consider the
features separately, in order to identify predictors and models to use when only 
some data source is available, and obtaining more accurate results when more
information can be combined.
RESULTS: Regarding parotid shrinkage, a number of good predictors is detected,
some already known and confirmed here, and some others found here, in particular 
among radiomics-based features. A number of models are also designed, some using 
single features and others involving models composition to improve classification
accuracy. In particular, the best model to be used at the initial treatment
stage, and another one applicable at the half treatment stage are identified.
Regarding 12-months toxicity, some possible predictors are detected, in
particular among radiomics-based features. Moreover, the relation between final
parotid shrinkage rate and 12-months xerostomia is evaluated. The method is
compared to the naïve Bayes classifier, which reveals similar results in terms of
classification accuracy and best predictors. The interpretable fuzzy rule-based
models are explicitly presented, and the dependence between predictors and
outcome is explained, thus furnishing in some cases helpful insights about the
considered problems.
CONCLUSION: Thanks to the performance and interpretability of the fuzzy
classification method employed, predictors of both parotid shrinkage and
xerostomia are detected, and their influence on each outcome is revealed.
Moreover, models for predicting parotid shrinkage at initial and half
radiotherapy stages are found.

Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.artmed.2017.03.004 
PMID: 28325604  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Transl Psychiatry. 2017 Mar 21;7(3):e0. doi: 10.1038/tp.2017.38.

Utilization of machine learning for prediction of post-traumatic stress: a
re-examination of cortisol in the prediction and pathways to non-remitting PTSD.

Galatzer-Levy IR(1)(2), Ma S(3), Statnikov A(4), Yehuda R(5), Shalev AY(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, New York University School of Medicine, New York,
NY, USA.
(2)Steven and Alexandra Cohen Center for the Study of Post-Traumatic Stress and
Traumatic Brain Injury, New York, NY, USA.
(3)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY, 
USA.
(5)Traumatic Stress Studies Division, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, James J
Peters VA Medical Center, Bronx, NY, USA.

To date, studies of biological risk factors have revealed inconsistent
relationships with subsequent post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The
inconsistent signal may reflect the use of data analytic tools that are ill
equipped for modeling the complex interactions between biological and
environmental factors that underlay post-traumatic psychopathology. Further,
using symptom-based diagnostic status as the group outcome overlooks the inherent
heterogeneity of PTSD, potentially contributing to failures to replicate. To
examine the potential yield of novel analytic tools, we reanalyzed data from a
large longitudinal study of individuals identified following trauma in the
general emergency room (ER) that failed to find a linear association between
cortisol response to traumatic events and subsequent PTSD. First, latent growth
mixture modeling empirically identified trajectories of post-traumatic symptoms, 
which then were used as the study outcome. Next, support vector machines with
feature selection identified sets of features with stable predictive accuracy and
built robust classifiers of trajectory membership (area under the receiver
operator characteristic curve (AUC)=0.82 (95% confidence interval
(CI)=0.80-0.85)) that combined clinical, neuroendocrine, psychophysiological and 
demographic information. Finally, graph induction algorithms revealed a unique
path from childhood trauma via lower cortisol during ER admission, to
non-remitting PTSD. Traditional general linear modeling methods then confirmed
the newly revealed association, thereby delineating a specific target population 
for early endocrine interventions. Advanced computational approaches offer
innovative ways for uncovering clinically significant, non-shared biological
signals in heterogeneous samples.

DOI: 10.1038/tp.2017.38 
PMCID: PMC5416681
PMID: 28323285  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Healthc Inform Res. 2017 Jan;23(1):43-52. doi: 10.4258/hir.2017.23.1.43. Epub
2017 Jan 31.

Applying of Decision Tree Analysis to Risk Factors Associated with Pressure
Ulcers in Long-Term Care Facilities.

Moon M(1), Lee SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, the Research Institute of Nursing Science, Kyungpook
National University, Daegu, Korea.
(2)College of Nursing, Keimyung University, Daegu, Korea.

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study was to use decision tree analysis to
explore the factors associated with pressure ulcers (PUs) among elderly people
admitted to Korean long-term care facilities.
METHODS: The data were extracted from the 2014 National Inpatient Sample
(NIS)-data of Health Insurance Review and Assessment Service (HIRA). A
MapReduce-based program was implemented to join and filter 5 tables of the NIS.
The outcome predicted by the decision tree model was the prevalence of PUs as
defined by the Korean Standard Classification of Disease-7 (KCD-7; code L89*).
Using R 3.3.1, a decision tree was generated with the finalized 15,856 cases and 
830 variables.
RESULTS: The decision tree displayed 15 subgroups with 8 variables showing 0.804 
accuracy, 0.820 sensitivity, and 0.787 specificity. The most significant primary 
predictor of PUs was length of stay less than 0.5 day. Other predictors were the 
presence of an infectious wound dressing, followed by having diagnoses numbering 
less than 3.5 and the presence of a simple dressing. Among diagnoses, "injuries
to the hip and thigh" was the top predictor ranking 5th overall. Total hospital
cost exceeding 2,200,000 Korean won (US $2,000) rounded out the top 7.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support previous studies that showed length of stay,
comorbidity, and total hospital cost were associated with PUs. Moreover, wound
dressings were commonly used to treat PUs. They also show that machine learning, 
such as a decision tree, could effectively predict PUs using big data.

DOI: 10.4258/hir.2017.23.1.43 
PMCID: PMC5334131
PMID: 28261530 

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: No potential conflict of
interest relevant to this article was reported.


65. PLoS One. 2017 Mar 3;12(3):e0169490. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169490.
eCollection 2017.

Uncovering precision phenotype-biomarker associations in traumatic brain injury
using topological data analysis.

Nielson JL(1)(2), Cooper SR(1)(2)(3), Yue JK(1)(2), Sorani MD(2), Inoue T(1)(2), 
Yuh EL(3), Mukherjee P(3), Petrossian TC(4), Paquette J(4), Lum PY(4), Carlsson
GE(4), Vassar MJ(1)(2), Lingsma HF(5), Gordon WA(6), Valadka AB(7), Okonkwo
DO(8), Manley GT(1)(2), Ferguson AR(1)(2)(9); TRACK-TBI Investigators.

Author information: 
(1)Brain and Spinal Injury Center (BASIC), Zuckerberg San Francisco General
Hospital, San Francisco, CA, United States of America.
(2)Department of Neurological Surgery, Weill Institute for Neurosciences,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA.
(3)Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, United States of America.
(4)Ayasdi, Inc, Palo Alto, CA, United States of America.
(5)Public Health, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands.
(6)Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine, Mount Sinai, 
New York, NY, United States of America.
(7)Department of Neurosurgery, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA,
United States of America.
(8)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, United
States of America.
(9)Department of Veterans Affairs, San Francisco VA Medical Center, San
Francisco, CA, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a complex disorder that is
traditionally stratified based on clinical signs and symptoms. Recent imaging and
molecular biomarker innovations provide unprecedented opportunities for improved 
TBI precision medicine, incorporating patho-anatomical and molecular mechanisms. 
Complete integration of these diverse data for TBI diagnosis and patient
stratification remains an unmet challenge.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: The Transforming Research and Clinical Knowledge in
Traumatic Brain Injury (TRACK-TBI) Pilot multicenter study enrolled 586 acute TBI
patients and collected diverse common data elements (TBI-CDEs) across the study
population, including imaging, genetics, and clinical outcomes. We then applied
topology-based data-driven discovery to identify natural subgroups of patients,
based on the TBI-CDEs collected. Our hypothesis was two-fold: 1) A machine
learning tool known as topological data analysis (TDA) would reveal data-driven
patterns in patient outcomes to identify candidate biomarkers of recovery, and 2)
TDA-identified biomarkers would significantly predict patient outcome recovery
after TBI using more traditional methods of univariate statistical tests. TDA
algorithms organized and mapped the data of TBI patients in multidimensional
space, identifying a subset of mild TBI patients with a specific multivariate
phenotype associated with unfavorable outcome at 3 and 6 months after injury.
Further analyses revealed that this patient subset had high rates of
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), and enrichment in several distinct genetic
polymorphisms associated with cellular responses to stress and DNA damage
(PARP1), and in striatal dopamine processing (ANKK1, COMT, DRD2).
CONCLUSIONS: TDA identified a unique diagnostic subgroup of patients with
unfavorable outcome after mild TBI that were significantly predicted by the
presence of specific genetic polymorphisms. Machine learning methods such as TDA 
may provide a robust method for patient stratification and treatment planning
targeting identified biomarkers in future clinical trials in TBI patients.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier NCT01565551.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0169490 
PMCID: PMC5336356
PMID: 28257413  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Eur J Trauma Emerg Surg. 2017 Dec;43(6):805-822. doi: 10.1007/s00068-016-0757-3. 
Epub 2017 Feb 22.

Survival prediction of trauma patients: a study on US National Trauma Data Bank.

Sefrioui I(1), Amadini R(2), Mauro J(3), El Fallahi A(4), Gabbrielli M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Sciences of Tetouan, University Abdelmalek Essaadi, Tétouan,
Morocco. sefrioui.imane@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Computing and Information Systems, The University of Melbourne, 
Melbourne, Australia.
(3)Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(4)National School of Applied Sciences of Tetouan, University Abdelmalek Essaadi,
Tétouan, Morocco.
(5)Department of Computer Science, University of Bologna/Lab. Focus INRIA,
Bologna, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Exceptional circumstances like major incidents or natural disasters
may cause a huge number of victims that might not be immediately and
simultaneously saved. In these cases it is important to define priorities
avoiding to waste time and resources for not savable victims. Trauma and Injury
Severity Score (TRISS) methodology is the well-known and standard system usually 
used by practitioners to predict the survival probability of trauma patients.
However, practitioners have noted that the accuracy of TRISS predictions is
unacceptable especially for severely injured patients. Thus, alternative methods 
should be proposed.
METHODS: In this work we evaluate different approaches for predicting whether a
patient will survive or not according to simple and easily measurable
observations. We conducted a rigorous, comparative study based on the most
important prediction techniques using real clinical data of the US National
Trauma Data Bank.
RESULTS: Empirical results show that well-known Machine Learning classifiers can 
outperform the TRISS methodology. Based on our findings, we can say that the best
approach we evaluated is Random Forest: it has the best accuracy, the best area
under the curve, and k-statistic, as well as the second-best sensitivity and
specificity. It has also a good calibration curve. Furthermore, its performance
monotonically increases as the dataset size grows, meaning that it can be very
effective to exploit incoming knowledge. Considering the whole dataset, it is
always better than TRISS. Finally, we implemented a new tool to compute the
survival of victims. This will help medical practitioners to obtain a better
accuracy than the TRISS tools.
CONCLUSION: Random Forests may be a good candidate solution for improving the
predictions on survival upon the standard TRISS methodology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00068-016-0757-3 
PMID: 28229175  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Neuroeng Rehabil. 2017 Feb 6;14(1):10. doi: 10.1186/s12984-017-0222-5.

In-lab versus at-home activity recognition in ambulatory subjects with incomplete
spinal cord injury.

Albert MV(1)(2)(3), Azeze Y(4)(5), Courtois M(6), Jayaraman A(4)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Max Nader Lab for Rehabilitation Technologies and Outcomes Research,
Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Chicago, USA. mva@cs.luc.edu.
(2)Department of Computer Science, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, USA.
mva@cs.luc.edu.
(3)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Northwestern University,
Evanston, USA. mva@cs.luc.edu.
(4)Max Nader Lab for Rehabilitation Technologies and Outcomes Research,
Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Chicago, USA.
(5)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Illinois Institute of Technology,
Chicago, USA.
(6)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Northwestern University,
Evanston, USA.
(7)Department of Computer Science, Loyola University Chicago, Chicago, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although commercially available activity trackers can aid in tracking
therapy and recovery of patients, most devices perform poorly for patients with
irregular movement patterns. Standard machine learning techniques can be applied 
on recorded accelerometer signals in order to classify the activities of
ambulatory subjects with incomplete spinal cord injury in a way that is specific 
to this population and the location of the recording-at home or in the clinic.
METHODS: Subjects were instructed to perform a standardized set of movements
while wearing a waist-worn accelerometer in the clinic and at-home. Activities
included lying, sitting, standing, walking, wheeling, and stair climbing.
Multiple classifiers and validation methods were used to quantify the ability of 
the machine learning techniques to distinguish the activities recorded in-lab or 
at-home.
RESULTS: In the lab, classifiers trained and tested using within-subject
cross-validation provided an accuracy of 91.6%. When the classifier was trained
on data collected in the lab but tested on at home data, the accuracy fell to
54.6% indicating distinct movement patterns between locations. However, the
accuracy of the at-home classifications, when training the classifier with
at-home data, improved to 85.9%.
CONCLUSION: Individuals with unique movement patterns can benefit from using
tailored activity recognition algorithms easily implemented using modern machine 
learning methods on collected movement data.

DOI: 10.1186/s12984-017-0222-5 
PMCID: PMC5294819
PMID: 28166824  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS One. 2017 Jan 3;12(1):e0168315. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168315.
eCollection 2017.

Long-Term Effects of Acute Stress on the Prefrontal-Limbic System in the Healthy 
Adult.

Li Y(1)(2), Hou X(1)(2), Wei D(1)(2), Du X(1)(2), Zhang Q(1)(2), Liu G(3), Qiu
J(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Cognition and Personality (SWU), Ministry of Education,
Chongqing, China.
(2)School of Psychology, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.
(3)College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Chongqing, China.

Most people are exposed to at least one traumatic event during the course of
their lives, but large numbers of people do not develop posttraumatic stress
disorders. Although previous studies have shown that repeated and chronic stress 
change the brain's structure and function, few studies have focused on the
long-term effects of acute stressful exposure in a nonclinical sample, especially
the morphology and functional connectivity changes in brain regions implicated in
emotional reactivity and emotion regulation. Forty-one months after the 5/12
Wenchuan earthquake, we investigated the effects of trauma exposure on the
structure and functional connectivity of the brains of trauma-exposed healthy
individuals compared with healthy controls matched for age, sex, and education.
We then used machine-learning algorithms with the brain structural features to
distinguish between the two groups at an individual level. In the trauma-exposed 
healthy individuals, our results showed greater gray matter density in
prefrontal-limbic brain systems, including the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex, 
medial prefrontal cortex, amygdala and hippocampus, than in the controls. Further
analysis showed stronger amygdala-hippocampus functional connectivity in the
trauma-exposed healthy compared to the controls. Our findings revealed that
survival of traumatic experiences, without developing PTSD, was associated with
greater gray matter density in the prefrontal-limbic systems related to emotional
regulation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0168315 
PMCID: PMC5207406
PMID: 28045980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.


69. Ann Am Thorac Soc. 2017 Mar;14(3):384-391. doi: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201611-905OC.

Dynamic and Personalized Risk Forecast in Step-Down Units. Implications for
Monitoring Paradigms.

Chen L(1), Ogundele O(2), Clermont G(3), Hravnak M(4), Pinsky MR(3), Dubrawski
AW(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Auton Laboratory, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(2)2 LifeBridge Critical Care, Sinai Hospital Baltimore, Baltimore, Maryland.
(3)3 Department of Critical Care Medicine, School of Medicine, University of
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; and.
(4)4 Department of Acute and Tertiary Care, University of Pittsburgh School of
Nursing, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.

RATIONALE: Cardiorespiratory insufficiency (CRI) is a term applied to the
manifestations of loss of normal cardiorespiratory reserve and portends a bad
outcome. CRI occurs commonly in hospitalized patients, but its risk escalation
patterns are unexplored.
OBJECTIVES: To describe the dynamic and personal character of CRI risk evolution 
observed through continuous vital sign monitoring of individual step-down unit
patients.
METHODS: Using a machine learning model, we estimated risk trends for CRI
(defined as exceedance of vital sign stability thresholds) for each of 1,971
admissions (1,880 unique patients) to a 24-bed adult surgical trauma step-down
unit at an urban teaching hospital in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania using continuously
recorded vital signs from standard bedside monitors. We compared and contrasted
risk trends during initial 4-hour periods after step-down unit admission, and
again during the 4 hours immediately before the CRI event, between cases (ever
had a CRI) and control subjects (never had a CRI). We further explored
heterogeneity of risk escalation patterns during the 4 hours before CRI among
cases, comparing personalized to nonpersonalized risk.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Estimated risk was significantly higher for cases 
(918) than control subjects (1,053; P ≤ 0.001) during the initial 4-hour stable
periods. Among cases, the aggregated nonpersonalized risk trend increased 2 hours
before the CRI, whereas the personalized risk trend became significantly
different from control subjects 90 minutes ahead. We further discovered several
unique phenotypes of risk escalation patterns among cases for nonpersonalized
(14.6% persistently high risk, 18.6% early onset, 66.8% late onset) and
personalized risk (7.7% persistently high risk, 8.9% early onset, 83.4% late
onset).
CONCLUSIONS: Insights from this proof-of-concept analysis may guide design of
dynamic and personalized monitoring systems that predict CRI, taking into account
the triage and real-time monitoring utility of vital signs. These monitoring
systems may prove useful in the dynamic allocation of technological and clinical 
personnel resources in acute care hospitals.

DOI: 10.1513/AnnalsATS.201611-905OC 
PMCID: PMC5427723
PMID: 28033032  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Brain Inj. 2016;30(12):1458-1468.

Supervised learning technique for the automated identification of white matter
hyperintensities in traumatic brain injury.

Stone JR(1)(2), Wilde EA(3)(4)(5)(6), Taylor BA(3)(4)(6), Tate DF(7), Levin
H(3)(4)(5), Bigler ED(8), Scheibel RS(3)(4), Newsome MR(3)(4), Mayer AR(9)(10),
Abildskov T(8), Black GM(4)(8), Lennon MJ(11), York GE(12), Agarwal R(3),
DeVillasante J(13), Ritter JL(14)(15), Walker PB(16), Ahlers ST(16), Tustison
NJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Radiology and Medical Imaging.
(2)b Department of Neurological Surgery , University of Virginia ,
Charlottesville , VA , USA.
(3)c Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center , Houston , TX , USA.
(4)d Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation.
(5)e Department of Neurology.
(6)f Department of Radiology , Baylor College of Medicine , Houston , TX , USA.
(7)g Missouri Institute of Mental Health, University of Missouri , St. Louis , MO
, USA.
(8)h Department of Psychology , Brigham Young University , Provo , UT , USA.
(9)i Department of Translational Neuroscience , The Mind Research Network ,
Albuquerque , NM , USA.
(10)j Department of Neurology , University of New Mexico Health Center ,
Albuquerque , NM , USA.
(11)k Hunter Holmes McGuire Veterans Affairs Medical Center , Richmond , VA ,
USA.
(12)l Alaska Radiology Associates , Anchorage , AK , USA.
(13)m Department of Radiology , USF Morsani College of Medicine , Tampa , FL ,
USA.
(14)n Department of Radiology , San Antonio Military Medical Center , San Antonio
, TX , USA.
(15)o Department of Radiology and Radiological Sciences , Uniformed Services
University of the Health Sciences , Washington , DC , USA.
(16)p Naval Medical Research Center , Silver Spring, MD , USA.

BACKGROUND: White matter hyperintensities (WMHs) are foci of abnormal signal
intensity in white matter regions seen with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
WMHs are associated with normal ageing and have shown prognostic value in
neurological conditions such as traumatic brain injury (TBI). The impracticality 
of manually quantifying these lesions limits their clinical utility and motivates
the utilization of machine learning techniques for automated segmentation
workflows.
METHODS: This study develops a concatenated random forest framework with image
features for segmenting WMHs in a TBI cohort. The framework is built upon the
Advanced Normalization Tools (ANTs) and ANTsR toolkits. MR (3D FLAIR, T2- and
T1-weighted) images from 24 service members and veterans scanned in the Chronic
Effects of Neurotrauma Consortium's (CENC) observational study were acquired.
Manual annotations were employed for both training and evaluation using a
leave-one-out strategy. Performance measures include sensitivity, positive
predictive value, [Formula: see text] score and relative volume difference.
RESULTS: Final average results were: sensitivity = 0.68 ± 0.38, positive
predictive value = 0.51 ± 0.40, [Formula: see text] = 0.52 ± 0.36, relative
volume difference = 43 ± 26%. In addition, three lesion size ranges are selected 
to illustrate the variation in performance with lesion size.
CONCLUSION: Paired with correlative outcome data, supervised learning methods may
allow for identification of imaging features predictive of diagnosis and
prognosis in individual TBI patients.

DOI: 10.1080/02699052.2016.1222080 
PMID: 27834541  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2016 Nov;81(5 Suppl 2 Proceedings of the 2015 Military 
Health System Research Symposium):S111-S115.

Machine learning and new vital signs monitoring in civilian en route care: A
systematic review of the literature and future implications for the military.

Liu NT(1), Salinas J.

Author information: 
(1)From the US Army Institute of Surgical Research, Fort Sam Houston, San
Antonio, Texas.

BACKGROUND: Although air transport medical services are today an integral part of
trauma systems in most developed countries, to date, there are no reviews on
recent innovations in civilian en route care. The purpose of this systematic
review was to identify potential machine learning and new vital signs monitoring 
technologies in civilian en route care that could help close civilian and
military capability gaps in monitoring and the early detection and treatment of
various trauma injuries.
METHODS: MEDLINE, the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, and citation
review of relevant primary and review articles were searched for studies
involving civilian en route care, air medical transport, and technologies from
January 2005 to November 2015. Data were abstracted on study design, population, 
year, sponsors, innovation category, details of technologies, and outcomes.
RESULTS: Thirteen observational studies involving civilian medical transport met 
inclusion criteria. Studies either focused on machine learning and software
algorithms (n = 5), new vital signs monitoring (n = 6), or both (n = 2).
Innovations involved continuous digital acquisition of physiologic data and
parameter extraction. Importantly, all studies (n = 13) demonstrated improved
outcomes where applicable and potential use during civilian and military en route
care. However, almost all studies required further validation in prospective
and/or randomized controlled trials.
CONCLUSION: Potential machine learning technologies and monitoring of novel vital
signs such as heart rate variability and complexity in civilian en route care
could help enhance en route care for our nation's war fighters. In a complex
global environment, they could potentially fill capability gaps such as
monitoring and the early detection and treatment of various trauma injuries.
However, the impact of these innovations and technologies will require further
validation before widespread acceptance and prehospital use.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Systematic review, level V.

DOI: 10.1097/TA.0000000000000937 
PMID: 26670115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Neurotrauma. 2017 Mar 1;34(5):1045-1053. doi: 10.1089/neu.2016.4526. Epub 2016 
Nov 21.

Detection of Mild Traumatic Brain Injury by Machine Learning Classification Using
Resting State Functional Network Connectivity and Fractional Anisotropy.

Vergara VM(1), Mayer AR(1)(2), Damaraju E(1)(3), Kiehl KA(1)(4), Calhoun V(1)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 The Mind Research Network and Lovelace Biomedical and Environmental Research
Institute , Albuquerque, New Mexico .
(2)2 Department of Neurology, University of New Mexico School of Medicine ,
Albuquerque, New Mexico .
(3)3 Department of ECE, University of New Mexico , Albuquerque, New Mexico .
(4)4 Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico , Albuquerque, New Mexico
.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) may adversely affect a person's thinking, memory,
personality, and behavior. While mild TBI (mTBI) diagnosis is challenging, there 
is a risk for long-term psychiatric, neurologic, and psychosocial problems in
some patients that motivates the search for new and better biomarkers. Recently, 
diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (dMRI) has shown promise in detecting mTBI, 
but its validity is still being investigated. Resting state functional network
connectivity (rsFNC) is another approach that is emerging as a promising option
for the diagnosis of mTBI. The present work investigated the use of rsFNC for
mTBI detection compared with dMRI results on the same cohort. Fifty patients with
mTBI (25 males) and age-sex matched healthy controls were recruited. Features
from dMRI were obtained using all voxels, the enhanced Z-score microstructural
assessment for pathology, and the distribution corrected Z-score. Features based 
on rsFNC were obtained through group independent component analysis and
correlation between pairs of resting state networks. A linear support vector
machine was used for classification and validated using leave-one-out cross
validation. Classification achieved a maximum accuracy of 84.1% for rsFNC and
75.5% for dMRI and 74.5% for both combined. A t test analysis revealed
significant increase in rsFNC between cerebellum versus sensorimotor networks and
between left angular gyrus versus precuneus in subjects with mTBI. These outcomes
suggest that inclusion of both common and unique information is important for
classification of mTBI. Results also suggest that rsFNC can yield viable
biomarkers that might outperform dMRI and points to connectivity to the
cerebellum as an important region for the detection of mTBI.

DOI: 10.1089/neu.2016.4526 
PMCID: PMC5333571
PMID: 27676221  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Front Pediatr. 2016 Jun 23;4:65. doi: 10.3389/fped.2016.00065. eCollection 2016.

Pre-Adult MRI of Brain Cancer and Neurological Injury: Multivariate Analyses.

Levman J(1), Takahashi E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Newborn Medicine, Boston Children's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA; Athinoula A. Martinos Center
for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Charlestown, MA, USA.

Brain cancer and neurological injuries, such as stroke, are life-threatening
conditions for which further research is needed to overcome the many challenges
associated with providing optimal patient care. Multivariate analysis (MVA) is a 
class of pattern recognition technique involving the processing of data that
contains multiple measurements per sample. MVA can be used to address a wide
variety of neuroimaging challenges, including identifying variables associated
with patient outcomes; understanding an injury's etiology, development, and
progression; creating diagnostic tests; assisting in treatment monitoring; and
more. Compared to adults, imaging of the developing brain has attracted less
attention from MVA researchers, however, remarkable MVA growth has occurred in
recent years. This paper presents the results of a systematic review of the
literature focusing on MVA technologies applied to brain injury and cancer in
neurological fetal, neonatal, and pediatric magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
With a wide variety of MRI modalities providing physiologically meaningful
biomarkers and new biomarker measurements constantly under development, MVA
techniques hold enormous potential toward combining available measurements toward
improving basic research and the creation of technologies that contribute to
improving patient care.

DOI: 10.3389/fped.2016.00065 
PMCID: PMC4917540
PMID: 27446888 


74. Stat Methods Med Res. 2018 Jan;27(1):286-297. doi: 10.1177/0962280215627335. Epub
2016 Jun 29.

Collaborative targeted maximum likelihood estimation for variable importance
measure: Illustration for functional outcome prediction in mild traumatic brain
injuries.

Pirracchio R(1), Yue JK(2)(3), Manley GT(2)(3), van der Laan MJ(4), Hubbard
AE(4); TRACK-TBI Investigators including Wayne A Gordon, Hester F Lingsma, Andrew
IR Maas, Pratik Mukherjee, David O Okonkwo, David M Schnyer, Alex B Valadka and
Esther L Yuh.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, UCSF, San Francisco General
Hospital, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(2)2 Brain and Spinal Injury Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)3 Department of Neurosurgery, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)4 Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of California
Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.

Standard statistical practice used for determining the relative importance of
competing causes of disease typically relies on ad hoc methods, often byproducts 
of machine learning procedures (stepwise regression, random forest, etc.). Causal
inference framework and data-adaptive methods may help to tailor parameters to
match the clinical question and free one from arbitrary modeling assumptions. Our
focus is on implementations of such semiparametric methods for a variable
importance measure (VIM). We propose a fully automated procedure for VIM based on
collaborative targeted maximum likelihood estimation (cTMLE), a method that
optimizes the estimate of an association in the presence of potentially numerous 
competing causes. We applied the approach to data collected from traumatic brain 
injury patients, specifically a prospective, observational study including three 
US Level-1 trauma centers. The primary outcome was a disability score (Glasgow
Outcome Scale - Extended (GOSE)) collected three months post-injury. We
identified clinically important predictors among a set of risk factors using a
variable importance analysis based on targeted maximum likelihood estimators
(TMLE) and on cTMLE. Via a parametric bootstrap, we demonstrate that the latter
procedure has the potential for robust automated estimation of variable
importance measures based upon machine-learning algorithms. The cTMLE estimator
was associated with substantially less positivity bias as compared to TMLE and
larger coverage of the 95% CI. This study confirms the power of an automated
cTMLE procedure that can target model selection via machine learning to estimate 
VIMs in complicated, high-dimensional data.

DOI: 10.1177/0962280215627335 
PMCID: PMC5589499
PMID: 27363429  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Accid Anal Prev. 2017 Aug;105:134-145. doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2016.05.003. Epub 2016 
May 14.

Can cyclist safety be improved with intelligent transport systems?

Silla A(1), Leden L(2), Rämä P(3), Scholliers J(4), Van Noort M(5), Bell D(6).

Author information: 
(1)VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd., P.O. Box 1000, 02044 VTT,
Finland. Electronic address: anne.silla@vtt.fi.
(2)VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd., P.O. Box 1000, 02044 VTT,
Finland. Electronic address: lars.leden@ltu.se.
(3)VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd., P.O. Box 1000, 02044 VTT,
Finland. Electronic address: pirkko.rama@vtt.fi.
(4)VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd., P.O. Box 1000, 02044 VTT,
Finland. Electronic address: johan.scholliers@vtt.fi.
(5)TNO, PO Box 49, 2600 AA Delft, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
martijnvn@yahoo.com.
(6)FACTUM Chaloupka & Risser OG, Danhausergasse 6/4, 1040 Vienna, Austria.
Electronic address: daniel.bell@factum.at.

In recent years, Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) have assisted in the
decrease of road traffic fatalities, particularly amongst passenger car
occupants. Vulnerable Road Users (VRUs) such as pedestrians, cyclists, moped
riders and motorcyclists, however, have not been that much in focus when
developing ITS. Therefore, there is a clear need for ITS which specifically
address VRUs as an integrated element of the traffic system. This paper presents 
the results of a quantitative safety impact assessment of five systems that were 
estimated to have high potential to improve the safety of cyclists, namely: Blind
Spot Detection (BSD), Bicycle to Vehicle communication (B2V), Intersection safety
(INS), Pedestrian and Cyclist Detection System+Emergency Braking (PCDS+EBR) and
VRU Beacon System (VBS). An ex-ante assessment method proposed by Kulmala (2010) 
targeted to assess the effects of ITS for cars was applied and further developed 
in this study to assess the safety impacts of ITS specifically designed for VRUs.
The main results of the assessment showed that all investigated systems affect
cyclist safety in a positive way by preventing fatalities and injuries. The
estimates considering 2012 accident data and full penetration showed that the
highest effects could be obtained by the implementation of PCDS+EBR and B2V,
whereas VBS had the lowest effect. The estimated yearly reduction in cyclist
fatalities in the EU-28 varied between 77 and 286 per system. A forecast for
2030, taking into accounts the estimated accident trends and penetration rates,
showed the highest effects for PCDS+EBR and BSD.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2016.05.003 
PMID: 27189629  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Am Coll Surg. 2016 Aug;223(2):259-270.e2. doi:
10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2016.04.046. Epub 2016 May 14.

A Prognostic Model of Surgical Site Infection Using Daily Clinical Wound
Assessment.

Sanger PC(1), van Ramshorst GH(2), Mercan E(3), Huang S(4), Hartzler AL(5),
Armstrong CA(6), Lordon RJ(7), Lober WB(8), Evans HL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics and Medical Education, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA. Electronic address: psanger@uw.edu.
(2)Department of Surgery, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Computer Science, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(4)Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA.
(5)Group Health Research Institute, Group Health Cooperative, Seattle, WA.
(6)Department of Surgery, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
(7)Department of Biomedical Informatics and Medical Education, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA.
(8)Department of Biobehavioral Nursing and Health Systems, and Biomedical
Informatics and Medical Education, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

BACKGROUND: Surgical site infection (SSI) remains a common, costly, and morbid
health care-associated infection. Early detection can improve outcomes, yet
previous risk models consider only baseline risk factors (BF) not incorporating a
proximate and timely data source-the wound itself. We hypothesize that
incorporation of daily wound assessment improves the accuracy of SSI
identification compared with traditional BF alone.
STUDY DESIGN: A prospective cohort of 1,000 post open abdominal surgery patients 
at an academic teaching hospital were examined daily for serial features (SF),
for example, wound characteristics and vital signs, in addition to standard BF,
for example, wound class. Using supervised machine learning, we trained 3 Naïve
Bayes classifiers (BF, SF, and BF+SF) using patient data from 1 to 5 days before 
diagnosis to classify SSI on the following day. For comparison, we also created a
simplified SF model that used logistic regression. Control patients without SSI
were matched on 5 similar consecutive postoperative days to avoid confounding by 
length of stay. Accuracy, sensitivity/specificity, and area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve were calculated on a training and hold-out testing
set.
RESULTS: Of 851 patients, 19.4% had inpatient SSIs. Univariate analysis showed
differences in C-reactive protein, surgery duration, and contamination, but no
differences in American Society of Anesthesiologists scores, diabetes, or
emergency surgery. The BF, SF, and BF+SF classifiers had area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curves of 0.67, 0.76, and 0.76, respectively. The
best-performing classifier (SF) had optimal sensitivity of 0.80, specificity of
0.64, positive predictive value of 0.35, and negative predictive value of 0.93.
Features most associated with subsequent SSI diagnosis were granulation degree,
exudate amount, nasogastric tube presence, and heart rate.
CONCLUSIONS: Serial features provided moderate positive predictive value and high
negative predictive value for early identification of SSI. Addition of baseline
risk factors did not improve identification. Features of evolving wound infection
are discernable before the day of diagnosis, based primarily on visual
inspection.

Copyright © 2016 American College of Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2016.04.046 
PMCID: PMC4961603
PMID: 27188832  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mil Med. 2016 May;181(5 Suppl):138-44. doi: 10.7205/MILMED-D-15-00170.

Dysphagia Management and Research in an Acute-Care Military Treatment Facility:
The Role of Applied Informatics.

Solomon NP(1), Dietsch AM(1), Dietrich-Burns KE(1), Styrmisdottir EL(2), Armao
CS(2).

Author information: 
(1)National Military Audiology and Speech Pathology Center, Walter Reed National 
Military Medical Center, 4954 North Palmer Road, Building 19, Bethesda, MD 20889.
(2)DecisionQ Corporation, 1010 Wisconsin Avenue, Northwest, Washington, DC 20007.

PURPOSE: This report describes the development and preliminary analysis of a
database for traumatically injured military service members with dysphagia.
METHODS: A multidimensional database was developed to capture clinical variables 
related to swallowing. Data were derived from clinical records and instrumental
swallow studies, and ranged from demographics, injury characteristics, swallowing
biomechanics, medications, and standardized tools (e.g., Glasgow Coma Scale,
Penetration-Aspiration Scale). Bayesian Belief Network modeling was used to
analyze the data at intermediate points, guide data collection, and predict
outcomes. Predictive models were validated with independent data via receiver
operating characteristic curves.
RESULTS: The first iteration of the model (n = 48) revealed variables that could 
be collapsed for the second model (n = 96). The ability to predict recovery from 
dysphagia improved from the second to third models (area under the curve = 0.68
to 0.86). The third model, based on 161 cases, revealed "initial diet
restrictions" as first-degree, and "Glasgow Coma Scale, intubation history, and
diet change" as second-degree associates for diet restrictions at discharge.
CONCLUSION: This project demonstrates the potential for bioinformatics to advance
understanding of dysphagia. This database in concert with Bayesian Belief Network
modeling makes it possible to explore predictive relationships between injuries
and swallowing function, individual variability in recovery, and appropriate
treatment options.

Reprint & Copyright © 2016 Association of Military Surgeons of the U.S.

DOI: 10.7205/MILMED-D-15-00170 
PMID: 27168564  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Mil Med. 2016 May;181(5 Suppl):127-31. doi: 10.7205/MILMED-D-15-00171.

Bayesian Scoring Systems for Military Pelvic and Perineal Blast Injuries: Is it
Time to Take a New Approach?

Mossadegh S(1), He S(2), Parker P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Queen Mary University of London, Blizard Institute, Barts and The London
School of Medicine and Dentistry, The Blizard Building, 4 Newark Street, London
E1 2AT, United Kingdom.
(2)School of Computer Science Centre for Systems Biology, University of
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, United Kingdom.
(3)Royal Centre for Defence Medicine, New Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham,
Mindelsohn Way, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2GW, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Various injury severity scores exist for trauma; it is known that
they do not correlate accurately to military injuries. A promising anatomical
scoring system for blast pelvic and perineal injury led to the development of an 
improved scoring system using machine-learning techniques.
METHODS: An unbiased genetic algorithm selected optimal anatomical and
physiological parameters from 118 military cases. A Naïve Bayesian model was
built using the proposed parameters to predict the probability of survival.
Ten-fold cross validation was employed to evaluate its performance.
RESULTS: Our model significantly out-performed Injury Severity Score (ISS),
Trauma ISS, New ISS, and the Revised Trauma Score in virtually all areas;
positive predictive value 0.8941, specificity 0.9027, accuracy 0.9056, and area
under curve 0.9059. A two-sample t test showed that the predictive performance of
the proposed scoring system was significantly better than the other systems (p < 
0.001).
CONCLUSION: With limited resources and the simplest of Bayesian methodologies, we
have demonstrated that the Naïve Bayesian model performed significantly better in
virtually all areas assessed by current scoring systems used for trauma. This is 
encouraging and highlights that more can be done to improve trauma systems not
only for our military injured, but also for civilian trauma victims.

Reprint & Copyright © 2016 Association of Military Surgeons of the U.S.

DOI: 10.7205/MILMED-D-15-00171 
PMID: 27168562  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Med Biol Eng Comput. 2017 Jan;55(1):45-55. doi: 10.1007/s11517-016-1504-y. Epub
2016 Apr 22.

A comparison of accuracy of fall detection algorithms (threshold-based vs.
machine learning) using waist-mounted tri-axial accelerometer signals from a
comprehensive set of falls and non-fall trials.

Aziz O(1)(2)(3), Musngi M(4), Park EJ(4), Mori G(5), Robinovitch SN(6)(7)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Injury Prevention and Mobility Laboratory, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby,
BC, Canada. oaziz@sfu.ca.
(2)School of Engineering Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.
oaziz@sfu.ca.
(3)School of Mechatronic Systems Engineering, Simon Fraser University, Surrey,
BC, Canada. oaziz@sfu.ca.
(4)School of Mechatronic Systems Engineering, Simon Fraser University, Surrey,
BC, Canada.
(5)School of Computing Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.
(6)Injury Prevention and Mobility Laboratory, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby,
BC, Canada.
(7)Department of Biomedical Physiology and Kinesiology, Simon Fraser University, 
Burnaby, BC, Canada.
(8)School of Engineering Science, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, BC, Canada.

Falls are the leading cause of injury-related morbidity and mortality among older
adults. Over 90 % of hip and wrist fractures and 60 % of traumatic brain injuries
in older adults are due to falls. Another serious consequence of falls among
older adults is the 'long lie' experienced by individuals who are unable to get
up and remain on the ground for an extended period of time after a fall.
Considerable research has been conducted over the past decade on the design of
wearable sensor systems that can automatically detect falls and send an alert to 
care providers to reduce the frequency and severity of long lies. While most
systems described to date incorporate threshold-based algorithms, machine
learning algorithms may offer increased accuracy in detecting falls. In the
current study, we compared the accuracy of these two approaches in detecting
falls by conducting a comprehensive set of falling experiments with 10 young
participants. Participants wore waist-mounted tri-axial accelerometers and
simulated the most common causes of falls observed in older adults, along with
near-falls and activities of daily living. The overall performance of five
machine learning algorithms was greater than the performance of five
threshold-based algorithms described in the literature, with support vector
machines providing the highest combination of sensitivity and specificity.

DOI: 10.1007/s11517-016-1504-y 
PMID: 27106749  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2016 Aug;134(2):91-103. doi: 10.1111/acps.12581. Epub 2016 
Apr 21.

Areas of controversy in neuroprogression in bipolar disorder.

Passos IC(1)(2), Mwangi B(3), Vieta E(4), Berk M(5)(6), Kapczinski F(1)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Bipolar Disorder Program, Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry, Hospital de
Clínicas de Porto Alegre (HCPA), Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul (UFRGS),
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(3)Center of Excellence on Mood Disorder, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral
Sciences, The University of Texas Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(4)Bipolar Disorders Program, Institut d'Investigacions Biomédiques Agustí Pi
Sunyer, CIBERSAM, University of Barcelona Hospital Clinic, Barcelona, Catalonia, 
Spain.
(5)IMPACT Strategic Research Centre, School of Medicine, Faculty of Health,
Deakin University, Geelong, VIC, Australia.
(6)Orygen, The National Centre of Excellence in Youth Mental Health and the
Centre for Youth Mental Health, the Department of Psychiatry and the Florey
Institute for Neuroscience and Mental Health, the University of Melbourne,
Parkville, VIC, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to review clinical features and biological underpinnings
related to neuroprogression in bipolar disorder (BD). Also, we discussed areas of
controversy and future research in the field.
METHOD: We systematically reviewed the extant literature pertaining to
neuroprogression and BD by searching PubMed and EMBASE for articles published up 
to March 2016.
RESULTS: A total of 114 studies were included. Neuroimaging and clinical evidence
from cross-sectional and longitudinal studies show that a subset of patients with
BD presents a neuroprogressive course with brain changes and unfavorable
outcomes. Risk factors associated with these unfavorable outcomes are number of
mood episodes, early trauma, and psychiatric and clinical comorbidity.
CONCLUSION: Illness trajectories are largely variable, and illness progression is
not a general rule in BD. The number of manic episodes seems to be the clinical
marker more robustly associated with neuroprogression in BD. However, the
majority of the evidence came from cross-sectional studies that are prone to
bias. Longitudinal studies may help to identify signatures of neuroprogression
and integrate findings from the field of neuroimaging, neurocognition, and
biomarkers.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/acps.12581 
PMID: 27097559  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Int J Psychophysiol. 2016 Apr;102:1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2016.02.002. Epub
2016 Feb 22.

Altered cross-frequency coupling in resting-state MEG after mild traumatic brain 
injury.

Antonakakis M(1), Dimitriadis SI(2), Zervakis M(3), Micheloyannis S(4), Rezaie
R(5), Babajani-Feremi A(6), Zouridakis G(7), Papanicolaou AC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Digital Image and Signal Processing Laboratory, School of Electronic and
Computer Engineering, Technical University of Crete, Chania 73100, Greece.
Electronic address: mantonakakis@isc.tuc.gr.
(2)Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences, Cardiff
University School of Medicine, Cardiff, United Kingdom; Cardiff University Brain 
Research Imaging Center (CUBRIC), School of Psychology, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, United Kingdom; Artificial Intelligence and Information Analysis
Laboratory, Department of Informatics, Aristotle University, Thessaloniki 54124, 
Greece; Neuroinformatics Group, Department of Informatics, Aristotle University
of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece. Electronic address:
http://www.neuroinformatics.gr.
(3)Digital Image and Signal Processing Laboratory, School of Electronic and
Computer Engineering, Technical University of Crete, Chania 73100, Greece.
(4)L. Widen Laboratory, School of Medicine, University of Crete, Greece.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Neurosciences, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA; Neuroscience Institute, Le
Bonheur Children's Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical Neurosciences, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA; Neuroscience Institute, Le
Bonheur Children's Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA; Department of Anatomy and
Neurobiology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN, USA.
(7)Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language (BCBL), Paseo Mikeletegi 69,
20009 Donostia-San Sebastián, Spain; Biomedical Imaging Lab, Departments of
Engineering Technology, Computer Science, Biomedical Engineering, and Electrical 
and Computer Engineering, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA.

Cross-frequency coupling (CFC) is thought to represent a basic mechanism of
functional integration of neural networks across distant brain regions. In this
study, we analyzed CFC profiles from resting state Magnetoencephalographic (MEG) 
recordings obtained from 30 mild traumatic brain injury (mTBI) patients and 50
controls. We used mutual information (MI) to quantify the phase-to-amplitude
coupling (PAC) of activity among the recording sensors in six nonoverlapping
frequency bands. After forming the CFC-based functional connectivity graphs, we
employed a tensor representation and tensor subspace analysis to identify the
optimal set of features for subject classification as mTBI or control. Our
results showed that controls formed a dense network of stronger local and global 
connections indicating higher functional integration compared to mTBI patients.
Furthermore, mTBI patients could be separated from controls with more than 90%
classification accuracy. These findings indicate that analysis of brain networks 
computed from resting-state MEG with PAC and tensorial representation of
connectivity profiles may provide a valuable biomarker for the diagnosis of mTBI.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2016.02.002 
PMID: 26910049  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Acad Emerg Med. 2016 Feb;23(2):171-8. doi: 10.1111/acem.12859. Epub 2016 Jan 14.

Automated Outcome Classification of Computed Tomography Imaging Reports for
Pediatric Traumatic Brain Injury.

Yadav K(1), Sarioglu E(2), Choi HA(3), Cartwright WB 4th(4), Hinds PS(5),
Chamberlain JM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA.
(2)Computer Science Department, Portland State University, Portland, OR.
(3)Computer Science Department, The George Washington University, Washington, DC.
(4)Howard University School of Medicine, Washington, DC.
(5)Children's Research Institute, Washington, DC.
(6)Division of Emergency Medicine, Children's National Health System, Washington,
DC.

BACKGROUND: The authors have previously demonstrated highly reliable automated
classification of free-text computed tomography (CT) imaging reports using a
hybrid system that pairs linguistic (natural language processing) and statistical
(machine learning) techniques. Previously performed for identifying the outcome
of orbital fracture in unprocessed radiology reports from a clinical data
repository, the performance has not been replicated for more complex outcomes.
OBJECTIVES: To validate automated outcome classification performance of a hybrid 
natural language processing (NLP) and machine learning system for brain CT
imaging reports. The hypothesis was that our system has performance
characteristics for identifying pediatric traumatic brain injury (TBI).
METHODS: This was a secondary analysis of a subset of 2,121 CT reports from the
Pediatric Emergency Care Applied Research Network (PECARN) TBI study. For that
project, radiologists dictated CT reports as free text, which were then
deidentified and scanned as PDF documents. Trained data abstractors manually
coded each report for TBI outcome. Text was extracted from the PDF files using
optical character recognition. The data set was randomly split evenly for
training and testing. Training patient reports were used as input to the Medical 
Language Extraction and Encoding (MedLEE) NLP tool to create structured output
containing standardized medical terms and modifiers for negation, certainty, and 
temporal status. A random subset stratified by site was analyzed using
descriptive quantitative content analysis to confirm identification of TBI
findings based on the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke
(NINDS) Common Data Elements project. Findings were coded for presence or
absence, weighted by frequency of mentions, and past/future/indication modifiers 
were filtered. After combining with the manual reference standard, a decision
tree classifier was created using data mining tools WEKA 3.7.5 and Salford
Predictive Miner 7.0. Performance of the decision tree classifier was evaluated
on the test patient reports.
RESULTS: The prevalence of TBI in the sampled population was 159 of 2,217 (7.2%).
The automated classification for pediatric TBI is comparable to our prior
results, with the notable exception of lower positive predictive value. Manual
review of misclassified reports, 95.5% of which were false-positives, revealed
that a sizable number of false-positive errors were due to differing outcome
definitions between NINDS TBI findings and PECARN clinical important TBI findings
and report ambiguity not meeting definition criteria.
CONCLUSIONS: A hybrid NLP and machine learning automated classification system
continues to show promise in coding free-text electronic clinical data. For
complex outcomes, it can reliably identify negative reports, but manual review of
positive reports may be required. As such, it can still streamline data
collection for clinical research and performance improvement.

© 2016 by the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/acem.12859 
PMCID: PMC5338693
PMID: 26766600  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Igaku Butsuri. 2016;36(1):35-38. doi: 10.11323/jjmp.36.1_35.

Applications of Machine Learning for Radiation Therapy.

[Article in Japanese]

Arimura H(1), Nakamoto T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Quantum Science, Department of Health Sciences, Faculty of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University.
(2)Division of Medical Quantum Science, Department of Health Sciences, Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University.

Radiation therapy has been highly advanced as image guided radiation therapy
(IGRT) by making advantage of image engineering technologies. Recently, novel
frameworks based on image engineering technologies as well as machine learning
technologies have been studied for sophisticating the radiation therapy. In this 
review paper, the author introduces several researches of applications of machine
learning for radiation therapy. For examples, a method to determine the threshold
values for standardized uptake value (SUV) for estimation of gross tumor volume
(GTV) in positron emission tomography (PET) images, an approach to estimate the
multileaf collimator (MLC) position errors between treatment plans and radiation 
delivery time, and prediction frameworks for esophageal stenosis and radiation
pneumonitis risk after radiation therapy are described. Finally, the author
introduces seven issues that one should consider when applying machine learning
models to radiation therapy.

DOI: 10.11323/jjmp.36.1_35 
PMID: 28428495  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Stat Methods Med Res. 2018 Aug;27(8):2504-2518. doi: 10.1177/0962280216682055.
Epub 2016 Dec 15.

The Balance Super Learner: A robust adaptation of the Super Learner to improve
estimation of the average treatment effect in the treated based on propensity
score matching.

Pirracchio R(1)(2)(3), Carone M(4).

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of California
at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(2)2 Département de Biostatistiques et Informatique Médicale, Unité INSERM U1153,
Equipe ECSTRA Université Paris Diderot, Hôpital Saint Louis, Paris, France.
(3)3 Department of Anesthesia and Perioperative Care, San Francisco General
Hospital & Trauma Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA, USA.
(4)4 Department of Biostatistics, School of Public Health, University of
Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.

Consistency of the propensity score estimators rely on correct specification of
the propensity score model. The propensity score is frequently estimated using a 
main effect logistic regression. It has recently been shown that the use of
ensemble machine learning algorithms, such as the Super Learner, could improve
covariate balance and reduce bias in a meaningful manner in the case of serious
model misspecification for treatment assignment. However, the loss functions
normally used by the Super Learner may not be appropriate for propensity score
estimation since the goal in this problem is not to optimize propensity score
prediction but rather to achieve the best possible balance in the covariate
distribution between treatment groups. In a simulation study, we evaluated the
benefit of a modification of the Super Learner by propensity score estimation
geared toward achieving covariate balance between the treated and untreated after
matching on the propensity score. Our simulation study included six different
scenarios characterized by various degrees of deviation from the usual main term 
logistic model for the true propensity score and outcome as well as the presence 
(or not) of instrumental variables. Our results suggest that the use of this
adapted Super Learner to estimate the propensity score can further improve the
robustness of propensity score matching estimators.

DOI: 10.1177/0962280216682055 
PMID: 28339317 


85. Acad Emerg Med. 2016 Mar;23(3):269-78. doi: 10.1111/acem.12876. Epub 2016 Feb 13.

Prediction of In-hospital Mortality in Emergency Department Patients With Sepsis:
A Local Big Data-Driven, Machine Learning Approach.

Taylor RA(1), Pare JR(1), Venkatesh AK(1), Mowafi H(1), Melnick ER(1), Fleischman
W(1), Hall MK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, Yale University, Yale-New Haven Hospital,
New Haven, CT.

Comment in
    Acad Emerg Med. 2016 Nov;23 (11):1307.

OBJECTIVES: Predictive analytics in emergency care has mostly been limited to the
use of clinical decision rules (CDRs) in the form of simple heuristics and
scoring systems. In the development of CDRs, limitations in analytic methods and 
concerns with usability have generally constrained models to a preselected small 
set of variables judged to be clinically relevant and to rules that are easily
calculated. Furthermore, CDRs frequently suffer from questions of
generalizability, take years to develop, and lack the ability to be updated as
new information becomes available. Newer analytic and machine learning techniques
capable of harnessing the large number of variables that are already available
through electronic health records (EHRs) may better predict patient outcomes and 
facilitate automation and deployment within clinical decision support systems. In
this proof-of-concept study, a local, big data-driven, machine learning approach 
is compared to existing CDRs and traditional analytic methods using the
prediction of sepsis in-hospital mortality as the use case.
METHODS: This was a retrospective study of adult ED visits admitted to the
hospital meeting criteria for sepsis from October 2013 to October 2014. Sepsis
was defined as meeting criteria for systemic inflammatory response syndrome with 
an infectious admitting diagnosis in the ED. ED visits were randomly partitioned 
into an 80%/20% split for training and validation. A random forest model (machine
learning approach) was constructed using over 500 clinical variables from data
available within the EHRs of four hospitals to predict in-hospital mortality. The
machine learning prediction model was then compared to a classification and
regression tree (CART) model, logistic regression model, and previously developed
prediction tools on the validation data set using area under the receiver
operating characteristic curve (AUC) and chi-square statistics.
RESULTS: There were 5,278 visits among 4,676 unique patients who met criteria for
sepsis. Of the 4,222 patients in the training group, 210 (5.0%) died during
hospitalization, and of the 1,056 patients in the validation group, 50 (4.7%)
died during hospitalization. The AUCs with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the
different models were as follows: random forest model, 0.86 (95% CI = 0.82 to
0.90); CART model, 0.69 (95% CI = 0.62 to 0.77); logistic regression model, 0.76 
(95% CI = 0.69 to 0.82); CURB-65, 0.73 (95% CI = 0.67 to 0.80); MEDS, 0.71 (95%
CI = 0.63 to 0.77); and mREMS, 0.72 (95% CI = 0.65 to 0.79). The random forest
model AUC was statistically different from all other models (p ≤ 0.003 for all
comparisons).
CONCLUSIONS: In this proof-of-concept study, a local big data-driven, machine
learning approach outperformed existing CDRs as well as traditional analytic
techniques for predicting in-hospital mortality of ED patients with sepsis.
Future research should prospectively evaluate the effectiveness of this approach 
and whether it translates into improved clinical outcomes for high-risk sepsis
patients. The methods developed serve as an example of a new model for predictive
analytics in emergency care that can be automated, applied to other clinical
outcomes of interest, and deployed in EHRs to enable locally relevant clinical
predictions.

© 2015 by the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/acem.12876 
PMCID: PMC5884101
PMID: 26679719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Wound Repair Regen. 2016 Jan-Feb;24(1):181-8. doi: 10.1111/wrr.12384. Epub 2016
Feb 4.

Rapid identification of slow healing wounds.

Jung K(1), Covington S(2), Sen CK(3), Januszyk M(4), Kirsner RS(5), Gurtner
GC(4), Shah NH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Biomedical Informatics, Stanford University, Stanford, California.
(2)Healogics Inc., Jacksonville, Florida.
(3)Departments of Surgery, Comprehensive Wound Center, Davis Heart and Lung
Research Institute, Centers for Regenerative Medicine and Cell-based Therapies,
The Ohio State University Medical Center, Columbus, Ohio.
(4)Department of Surgery, Division of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California.
(5)Department of Dermatology and Cutaneous Surgery, University of Miami Miller
School of Medicine, Miami, Florida.
(6)Center for Biomedical Informatics Research, Stanford University, Stanford,
California.

Chronic nonhealing wounds have a prevalence of 2% in the United States, and cost 
an estimated $50 billion annually. Accurate stratification of wounds for risk of 
slow healing may help guide treatment and referral decisions. We have applied
modern machine learning methods and feature engineering to develop a predictive
model for delayed wound healing that uses information collected during routine
care in outpatient wound care centers. Patient and wound data was collected at 68
outpatient wound care centers operated by Healogics Inc. in 26 states between
2009 and 2013. The dataset included basic demographic information on 59,953
patients, as well as both quantitative and categorical information on 180,696
wounds. Wounds were split into training and test sets by randomly assigning
patients to training and test sets. Wounds were considered delayed with respect
to healing time if they took more than 15 weeks to heal after presentation at a
wound care center. Eleven percent of wounds in this dataset met this criterion.
Prognostic models were developed on training data available in the first week of 
care to predict delayed healing wounds. A held out subset of the training set was
used for model selection, and the final model was evaluated on the test set to
evaluate discriminative power and calibration. The model achieved an area under
the curve of 0.842 (95% confidence interval 0.834-0.847) for the delayed healing 
outcome and a Brier reliability score of 0.00018. Early, accurate prediction of
delayed healing wounds can improve patient care by allowing clinicians to
increase the aggressiveness of intervention in patients most at risk.

© 2015 by the Wound Healing Society.

DOI: 10.1111/wrr.12384 
PMCID: PMC4820011
PMID: 26606167  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Proteome Res. 2016 Jan 4;15(1):182-92. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00704. Epub
2015 Dec 8.

Mass-Spectrometry-Based Proteomics Reveals Organ-Specific Expression Patterns To 
Be Used as Forensic Evidence.

Dammeier S(1), Nahnsen S(2), Veit J(3), Wehner F(4), Ueffing M(1), Kohlbacher
O(2)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Medical Proteome Center, University
Hospital Tuebingen , Naegelestrasse 5, 72074 Tuebingen, Germany.
(2)Quantitative Biology Center, Eberhard Karls University of Tuebingen , Auf der 
Morgenstelle 10, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany.
(3)Center for Bioinformatics and Department of Computer Science, Eberhard Karls
University of Tuebingen , Sand 14, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany.
(4)Institute for Forensic Medicine, Eberhard Karls University of Tuebingen ,
Naegelestrasse 5, 72074 Tuebingen, Germany.

Standard forensic procedures to examine bullets after an exchange of fire include
a mechanical or ballistic reconstruction of the event. While this is routine to
identify which projectile hit a subject by DNA analysis of biological material on
the surface of the projectile, it is rather difficult to determine which
projectile caused the lethal injury--often the crucial point with regard to legal
proceedings. With respect to fundamental law it is the duty of the public
authority to make every endeavor to solve every homicide case. To improve
forensic examinations, we present a forensic proteomic method to investigate
biological material from a projectile's surface and determine the tissues
traversed by it. To obtain a range of relevant samples, different major bovine
organs were penetrated with projectiles experimentally. After tryptic
"on-surface" digestion, mass-spectrometry-based proteome analysis, and
statistical data analysis, we were able to achieve a cross-validated organ
classification accuracy of >99%. Different types of anticipated external
variables exhibited no prominent influence on the findings. In addition, shooting
experiments were performed to validate the results. Finally, we show that these
concepts could be applied to a real case of murder to substantially improve the
forensic reconstruction.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00704 
PMID: 26593679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2015 Dec 1;93(5):1127-35. doi:
10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.07.2286. Epub 2015 Nov 11.

Machine Learning Approaches for Predicting Radiation Therapy Outcomes: A
Clinician's Perspective.

Kang J(1), Schwartz R(2), Flickinger J(3), Beriwal S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of Pittsburgh-Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.
(3)Departments of Radiation Oncology and Neurological Surgery, University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(4)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Electronic address: beriwals@upmc.edu.

Radiation oncology has always been deeply rooted in modeling, from the early days
of isoeffect curves to the contemporary Quantitative Analysis of Normal Tissue
Effects in the Clinic (QUANTEC) initiative. In recent years, medical modeling for
both prognostic and therapeutic purposes has exploded thanks to increasing
availability of electronic data and genomics. One promising direction that
medical modeling is moving toward is adopting the same machine learning methods
used by companies such as Google and Facebook to combat disease. Broadly defined,
machine learning is a branch of computer science that deals with making
predictions from complex data through statistical models. These methods serve to 
uncover patterns in data and are actively used in areas such as speech
recognition, handwriting recognition, face recognition, "spam" filtering (junk
email), and targeted advertising. Although multiple radiation oncology research
groups have shown the value of applied machine learning (ML), clinical adoption
has been slow due to the high barrier to understanding these complex models by
clinicians. Here, we present a review of the use of ML to predict radiation
therapy outcomes from the clinician's point of view with the hope that it lowers 
the "barrier to entry" for those without formal training in ML. We begin by
describing 7 principles that one should consider when evaluating (or creating) an
ML model in radiation oncology. We next introduce 3 popular ML methods--logistic 
regression (LR), support vector machine (SVM), and artificial neural network
(ANN)--and critique 3 seminal papers in the context of these principles. Although
current studies are in exploratory stages, the overall methodology has
progressively matured, and the field is ready for larger-scale further
investigation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijrobp.2015.07.2286 
PMID: 26581149  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Acad Emerg Med. 2015 Oct;22(10):1155-63. doi: 10.1111/acem.12755. Epub 2015 Sep
16.

Are Mortality and Acute Morbidity in Patients Presenting With Nonspecific
Complaints Predictable Using Routine Variables?

Jenny MA(1), Hertwig R(1), Ackermann S(2), Messmer AS(3), Karakoumis J(2), Nickel
CH(2), Bingisser R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Adaptive Rationality, Max Planck Institute for Human Development,
Berlin-Brandenburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, University Hospital Basel, Basel-Stadt,
Switzerland.
(3)Division of Trauma, Emergency, and Acute Medicine, King's College Hospital,
Denmark Hill, London, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Patients presenting to the emergency department (ED) with nonspecific
complaints are difficult to accurately triage, risk stratify, and diagnose. This 
can delay appropriate treatment. The extent to which key medical outcomes are at 
all predictable in these patients, and which (if any) predictors are useful, has 
previously been unclear. To investigate these questions, we tested an array of
statistical and machine learning models in a large group of patients and
estimated the predictability of mortality (which occurred in 6.6% of our sample
of patients), acute morbidity (58%), and presence of acute infectious disease
(28.2%).
METHODS: To investigate whether the best available tools can predict the three
key outcomes, we fed data from a sample of 1,278 ED patients with nonspecific
complaints into 17 state-of-the-art statistical and machine learning models. The 
patient sample stems from a diagnostic multicenter study with prospective 30-day 
follow-up conducted in Switzerland. Predictability of the three key medical
outcomes was quantified by computing the area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve (AUC) for each model.
RESULTS: The models performed at different levels but, on average, the
predictability of the target outcomes ranged between 0.71 and 0.82. The better
models clearly outperformed physicians' intuitive judgments of how ill patients
looked (AUC = 0.67 for mortality, 0.65 for morbidity, and 0.60 for infectious
disease).
CONCLUSIONS: Modeling techniques can be used to derive formalized models that, on
average, predict the outcomes of mortality, acute morbidity, and acute infectious
disease in patients with nonspecific complaints with a level of accuracy far
beyond chance. The models also predicted these outcomes more accurately than did 
physicians' intuitive judgments of how ill the patients look; however, the latter
was among the small set of best predictors for mortality and acute morbidity.
These results lay the groundwork for further refining triage and risk
stratification tools for patients with nonspecific complaints. More research,
informed by whether the goal of a model is high sensitivity or high specificity, 
is needed to develop readily applicable clinical decision support tools (e.g.,
decision trees) that could be supported by electronic health records.

© 2015 by the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/acem.12755 
PMID: 26375290  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2015;216:329-32.

An Intelligent Ecosystem for Providing Support in Prehospital Trauma Care in
Cuenca, Ecuador.

Timbi-Sisalima C(1), Rodas EB(2), Salamea JC(2), Sacoto H(2), Monje-Ortega D(3), 
Robles-Bykbaev V(1).

Author information: 
(1)GI-IATa, Universidad Politécnica Salesiana, Cuenca - Ecuador.
(2)Universidad del Azuay, Cuenca - Ecuador.
(3)Grupo de Investigación en Telemedicina/Telesalud - CEDIA.

According to facts given by the World Health Organization, one in ten deaths
worldwide is due to an external cause of injury. In the field of pre-hospital
trauma care, adequate and timely treatment in the golden period can impact the
survival of a patient. The aim of this paper is to show the design of a complete 
ecosystem proposed to support the evaluation and treatment of trauma victims,
using standard tools and vocabulary such as OpenEHR, as well as mobile systems
and expert systems to support decision-making. Preliminary results of the
developed applications are presented, as well as trauma-related data from the
city of Cuenca, Ecuador.


PMID: 26262065  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2015 Jul;79(1):85-90; discussion 90. doi:
10.1097/TA.0000000000000698.

Predicting secondary insults after severe traumatic brain injury.

Bonds BW(1), Yang S, Hu PF, Kalpakis K, Stansbury LG, Scalea TM, Stein DM.

Author information: 
(1)From the Shock Trauma Anesthesia Research Organized Research Center,
University of Maryland School of Medicine and R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center,
Baltimore, Maryland.

BACKGROUND: Secondary insults such as hypotension, hypoxia, cerebral
hypoperfusion, and intracranial hypertension are associated with poor outcome
following severe traumatic brain injury (TBI). Preventing and minimizing the
effect of secondary insults are essential in the management of severe TBI. At
present, clinicians have no way to predict the development of these events,
limiting their ability to plan appropriate timing of interventions. We
hypothesized that processing continuous vital signs (VS) data using machine
learning methods could predict the development of future intracranial
hypertension.
METHODS: Continuous VS including intracranial pressure (ICP), heart rate,
systolic blood pressure, and mean arterial pressure data were collected from
adult patients admitted to a single Level I trauma center requiring an ICP
monitor. We tested the ability of Nearest Neighbor Regression (NNR) to predict
changes in ICP by algorithmically learning from the patients' past physiology.
RESULTS: Continuous VS were collected on 132 adult patients over a minimum of 3
hours per patient (5,466 hours total; 65,600 data points). Bland-Altman plots
show that NNR provides good agreement in predicting actual ICP with a bias of
0.02 (±2 SD = 4 mm Hg) for the subsequent 5 minutes and -0.02 (±2 SD = 10 mm Hg) 
for the subsequent 2 hours.
CONCLUSION: We have demonstrated that with the use of physiologic data, it is
possible to predict with reasonable accuracy future ICP levels following severe
TBI. NNR predicts ICP changes in clinically useful time frames. This ability to
predict events may allow clinicians to make better decisions about the timing of 
necessary interventions, and this method could support the future development of 
minimally invasive ICP monitoring systems, which may lead to better overall
clinical outcomes after severe TBI.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Prognostic study, level III.

DOI: 10.1097/TA.0000000000000698 
PMID: 26091319  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Health Econ. 2015 Sep;24(9):1213-28. doi: 10.1002/hec.3189. Epub 2015 Jun 8.

Evaluation of the Effect of a Continuous Treatment: A Machine Learning Approach
with an Application to Treatment for Traumatic Brain Injury.

Kreif N(1), Grieve R(1), Díaz I(2), Harrison D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Services Research and Policy, London School of Hygiene & 
Tropical Medicine, London, UK.
(2)Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(3)Intensive Care National Audit & Research Centre, London, UK.

For a continuous treatment, the generalised propensity score (GPS) is defined as 
the conditional density of the treatment, given covariates. GPS adjustment may be
implemented by including it as a covariate in an outcome regression. Here, the
unbiased estimation of the dose-response function assumes correct specification
of both the GPS and the outcome-treatment relationship. This paper introduces a
machine learning method, the 'Super Learner', to address model selection in this 
context. In the two-stage estimation approach proposed, the Super Learner selects
a GPS and then a dose-response function conditional on the GPS, as the convex
combination of candidate prediction algorithms. We compare this approach with
parametric implementations of the GPS and to regression methods. We contrast the 
methods in the Risk Adjustment in Neurocritical care cohort study, in which we
estimate the marginal effects of increasing transfer time from emergency
departments to specialised neuroscience centres, for patients with acute
traumatic brain injury. With parametric models for the outcome, we find that
dose-response curves differ according to choice of specification. With the Super 
Learner approach to both regression and the GPS, we find that transfer time does 
not have a statistically significant marginal effect on the outcomes.

© 2015 The Authors. Health Economics Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/hec.3189 
PMCID: PMC4744663
PMID: 26059721  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. BMC Med Res Methodol. 2015 Mar 17;15:22. doi: 10.1186/s12874-015-0015-0.

Predictive modeling in pediatric traumatic brain injury using machine learning.

Chong SL(1), Liu N(2)(3), Barbier S(4), Ong ME(5)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, KK Women's and Children's Hospital,
Singapore, Singapore. chong.shu-ling@kkh.com.sg.
(2)Department of Emergency Medicine, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore,
Singapore. liu.nan@sgh.com.sg.
(3)Centre for Quantitative Medicine, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore,
Singapore. liu.nan@sgh.com.sg.
(4)Centre for Quantitative Medicine, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, Singapore,
Singapore. sylvaine.barbier@duke-nus.edu.sg.
(5)Department of Emergency Medicine, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore,
Singapore. marcus.ong.e.h@sgh.com.sg.
(6)Health Services and Systems Research, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School,
Singapore, Singapore. marcus.ong.e.h@sgh.com.sg.

BACKGROUND: Pediatric traumatic brain injury (TBI) constitutes a significant
burden and diagnostic challenge in the emergency department (ED). While large
North American research networks have derived clinical prediction rules for the
head injured child, these may not be generalizable to practices in countries with
traditionally low rates of computed tomography (CT). We aim to study predictors
for moderate to severe TBI in our ED population aged < 16 years.
METHODS: This was a retrospective case-control study based on data from a
prospective surveillance head injury database. Cases were included if patients
presented from 2006 to 2014, with moderate to severe TBI. Controls were
age-matched head injured children from the registry, obtained in a 4 control: 1
case ratio. These children remained well on diagnosis and follow up.
Demographics, history, and physical examination findings were analyzed and
patients followed up for the clinical course and outcome measures of death and
neurosurgical intervention. To predict moderate to severe TBI, we built a machine
learning (ML) model and a multivariable logistic regression model and compared
their performances by means of Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) analysis.
RESULTS: There were 39 cases and 156 age-matched controls. The following 4
predictors remained statistically significant after multivariable analysis:
Involvement in road traffic accident, a history of loss of consciousness,
vomiting and signs of base of skull fracture. The logistic regression model was
created with these 4 variables while the ML model was built with 3 extra
variables, namely the presence of seizure, confusion and clinical signs of skull 
fracture. At the optimal cutoff scores, the ML method improved upon the logistic 
regression method with respect to the area under the ROC curve (0.98 vs 0.93),
sensitivity (94.9% vs 82.1%), specificity (97.4% vs 92.3%), PPV (90.2% vs 72.7%),
and NPV (98.7% vs 95.4%).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, we demonstrated the feasibility of using machine
learning as a tool to predict moderate to severe TBI. If validated on a large
scale, the ML method has the potential not only to guide discretionary use of CT,
but also a more careful selection of head injured children who warrant closer
monitoring in the hospital.

DOI: 10.1186/s12874-015-0015-0 
PMCID: PMC4374377
PMID: 25886156  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 27;10(3):e0120031. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120031.
eCollection 2015.

Variable importance and prediction methods for longitudinal problems with missing
variables.

Díaz I(1), Hubbard A(2), Decker A(2), Cohen M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.
(2)Division of Biostatistics, University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA, USA.

We present prediction and variable importance (VIM) methods for longitudinal data
sets containing continuous and binary exposures subject to missingness. We
demonstrate the use of these methods for prognosis of medical outcomes of severe 
trauma patients, a field in which current medical practice involves rules of
thumb and scoring methods that only use a few variables and ignore the dynamic
and high-dimensional nature of trauma recovery. Well-principled prediction and
VIM methods can provide a tool to make care decisions informed by the
high-dimensional patient's physiological and clinical history. Our VIM parameters
are analogous to slope coefficients in adjusted regressions, but are not
dependent on a specific statistical model, nor require a certain functional form 
of the prediction regression to be estimated. In addition, they can be causally
interpreted under causal and statistical assumptions as the expected outcome
under time-specific clinical interventions, related to changes in the mean of the
outcome if each individual experiences a specified change in the variable
(keeping other variables in the model fixed). Better yet, the targeted MLE used
is doubly robust and locally efficient. Because the proposed VIM does not
constrain the prediction model fit, we use a very flexible ensemble learner (the 
SuperLearner), which returns a linear combination of a list of user-given
algorithms. Not only is such a prediction algorithm intuitive appealing, it has
theoretical justification as being asymptotically equivalent to the oracle
selector. The results of the analysis show effects whose size and significance
would have been not been found using a parametric approach (such as stepwise
regression or LASSO). In addition, the procedure is even more compelling as the
predictor on which it is based showed significant improvements in cross-validated
fit, for instance area under the curve (AUC) for a receiver-operator curve (ROC).
Thus, given that 1) our VIM applies to any model fitting procedure, 2) under
assumptions has meaningful clinical (causal) interpretations and 3) has
asymptotic (influence-curve) based robust inference, it provides a compelling
alternative to existing methods for estimating variable importance in
high-dimensional clinical (or other) data.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120031 
PMCID: PMC4376910
PMID: 25815719  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Accid Anal Prev. 2015 Jun;79:41-9. doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2015.03.018. Epub 2015 Mar 
19.

Machine learning approaches to analysing textual injury surveillance data: a
systematic review.

Vallmuur K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Accident Research and Road Safety - Queensland, School of
Psychology and Counselling, Faculty of Health, Queensland University of
Technology, Kelvin Grove 4059, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. Electronic
address: k.vallmuur@qut.edu.au.

OBJECTIVE: To synthesise recent research on the use of machine learning
approaches to mining textual injury surveillance data.
DESIGN: Systematic review.
DATA SOURCES: The electronic databases which were searched included PubMed,
Cinahl, Medline, Google Scholar, and Proquest. The bibliography of all relevant
articles was examined and associated articles were identified using a snowballing
technique.
SELECTION CRITERIA: For inclusion, articles were required to meet the following
criteria: (a) used a health-related database, (b) focused on injury-related
cases, AND used machine learning approaches to analyse textual data.
METHODS: The papers identified through the search were screened resulting in 16
papers selected for review. Articles were reviewed to describe the databases and 
methodology used, the strength and limitations of different techniques, and
quality assurance approaches used. Due to heterogeneity between studies
meta-analysis was not performed.
RESULTS: Occupational injuries were the focus of half of the machine learning
studies and the most common methods described were Bayesian probability or
Bayesian network based methods to either predict injury categories or extract
common injury scenarios. Models were evaluated through either comparison with
gold standard data or content expert evaluation or statistical measures of
quality. Machine learning was found to provide high precision and accuracy when
predicting a small number of categories, was valuable for visualisation of injury
patterns and prediction of future outcomes. However, difficulties related to
generalizability, source data quality, complexity of models and integration of
content and technical knowledge were discussed.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of narrative text for injury surveillance has grown in
popularity, complexity and quality over recent years. With advances in data
mining techniques, increased capacity for analysis of large databases, and
involvement of computer scientists in the injury prevention field, along with
more comprehensive use and description of quality assurance methods in text
mining approaches, it is likely that we will see a continued growth and
advancement in knowledge of text mining in the injury field.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2015.03.018 
PMID: 25795924  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Brain Struct Funct. 2016 May;221(4):1911-25. doi: 10.1007/s00429-015-1012-0. Epub
2015 Feb 27.

Frontotemporal correlates of impulsivity and machine learning in retired
professional athletes with a history of multiple concussions.

Goswami R(1)(2), Dufort P(1)(3), Tartaglia MC(1)(4)(5), Green RE(1)(6), Crawley
A(1)(2)(3)(7), Tator CH(1)(2)(7)(8)(9), Wennberg R(1)(5), Mikulis DJ(1)(2)(3)(7),
Keightley M(1)(10), Davis KD(11)(12)(13)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Sports Concussion Project, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
(2)Division of Brain, Imaging and Behaviour-Systems Neuroscience, Toronto Western
Research Institute, Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network, 399
Bathurst Street, Room MP14-306, Toronto, ON, M5T 2S8, Canada.
(3)Department of Medical Imaging, Toronto Western Hospital and University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(4)Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada.
(5)Division of Neurology, Krembil Neuroscience Centre, Toronto, Canada.
(6)Toronto Rehabilitation Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada.
(7)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(8)Division of Neurosurgery, Krembil Neuroscience Centre, Toronto Western
Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
(9)Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(10)Department of Occupational Science and Occupational Therapy, University of
Toronto and Holland Bloorview Kids Rehabilitation Hospital, Toronto, Canada.
(11)Canadian Sports Concussion Project, Toronto Western Hospital, Toronto,
Canada. kdavis@uhnres.utoronto.ca.
(12)Division of Brain, Imaging and Behaviour-Systems Neuroscience, Toronto
Western Research Institute, Toronto Western Hospital, University Health Network, 
399 Bathurst Street, Room MP14-306, Toronto, ON, M5T 2S8, Canada.
kdavis@uhnres.utoronto.ca.
(13)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
kdavis@uhnres.utoronto.ca.
(14)Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
kdavis@uhnres.utoronto.ca.

The frontotemporal cortical network is associated with behaviours such as
impulsivity and aggression. The health of the uncinate fasciculus (UF) that
connects the orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) with the anterior temporal lobe (ATL) may
be a crucial determinant of behavioural regulation. Behavioural changes can
emerge after repeated concussion and thus we used MRI to examine the UF and
connected gray matter as it relates to impulsivity and aggression in retired
professional football players who had sustained multiple concussions.
Behaviourally, athletes had faster reaction times and an increased error rate on 
a go/no-go task, and increased aggression and mania compared to controls. MRI
revealed that the athletes had (1) cortical thinning of the ATL, (2) negative
correlations of OFC thickness with aggression and task errors, indicative of
impulsivity, (3) negative correlations of UF axial diffusivity with error rates
and aggression, and (4) elevated resting-state functional connectivity between
the ATL and OFC. Using machine learning, we found that UF diffusion imaging
differentiates athletes from healthy controls with significant classifiers based 
on UF mean and radial diffusivity showing 79-84 % sensitivity and specificity,
and 0.8 areas under the ROC curves. The spatial pattern of classifier weights
revealed hot spots at the orbitofrontal and temporal ends of the UF. These data
implicate the UF system in the pathological outcomes of repeated concussion as
they relate to impulsive behaviour. Furthermore, a support vector machine has
potential utility in the general assessment and diagnosis of brain abnormalities 
following concussion.

DOI: 10.1007/s00429-015-1012-0 
PMCID: PMC4853456
PMID: 25721800  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Med Image Anal. 2015 Apr;21(1):40-58. doi: 10.1016/j.media.2014.12.003. Epub 2014
Dec 24.

Robust whole-brain segmentation: application to traumatic brain injury.

Ledig C(1), Heckemann RA(2), Hammers A(3), Lopez JC(4), Newcombe VF(5),
Makropoulos A(6), Lötjönen J(7), Menon DK(5), Rueckert D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Image Analysis Group, Department of Computing, Imperial College
London, UK. Electronic address: christian.ledig@imperial.ac.uk.
(2)MedTech West, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, University of
Gothenburg, Sweden; The Neurodis Foundation, CERMEP, Lyon, France; Division of
Brain Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, UK.
(3)The Neurodis Foundation, CERMEP, Lyon, France; Division of Brain Sciences,
Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, UK; The PET Centre, Division of
Imaging Sciences and Biomedical Engineering Kings College London, St Thomas
Hospital, London, UK.
(4)MedTech West, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, University of
Gothenburg, Sweden.
(5)University Division of Anaesthesia, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Biomedical Image Analysis Group, Department of Computing, Imperial College
London, UK.
(7)Knowledge Intensive Services, VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland,
Tampere, Finland.

We propose a framework for the robust and fully-automatic segmentation of
magnetic resonance (MR) brain images called "Multi-Atlas Label Propagation with
Expectation-Maximisation based refinement" (MALP-EM). The presented approach is
based on a robust registration approach (MAPER), highly performant label fusion
(joint label fusion) and intensity-based label refinement using EM. We further
adapt this framework to be applicable for the segmentation of brain images with
gross changes in anatomy. We propose to account for consistent registration
errors by relaxing anatomical priors obtained by multi-atlas propagation and a
weighting scheme to locally combine anatomical atlas priors and intensity-refined
posterior probabilities. The method is evaluated on a benchmark dataset used in a
recent MICCAI segmentation challenge. In this context we show that MALP-EM is
competitive for the segmentation of MR brain scans of healthy adults when
compared to state-of-the-art automatic labelling techniques. To demonstrate the
versatility of the proposed approach, we employed MALP-EM to segment 125 MR brain
images into 134 regions from subjects who had sustained traumatic brain injury
(TBI). We employ a protocol to assess segmentation quality if no manual reference
labels are available. Based on this protocol, three independent, blinded raters
confirmed on 13 MR brain scans with pathology that MALP-EM is superior to
established label fusion techniques. We visually confirm the robustness of our
segmentation approach on the full cohort and investigate the potential of derived
symmetry-based imaging biomarkers that correlate with and predict clinically
relevant variables in TBI such as the Marshall Classification (MC) or Glasgow
Outcome Score (GOS). Specifically, we show that we are able to stratify TBI
patients with favourable outcomes from non-favourable outcomes with 64.7%
accuracy using acute-phase MR images and 66.8% accuracy using follow-up MR
images. Furthermore, we are able to differentiate subjects with the presence of a
mass lesion or midline shift from those with diffuse brain injury with 76.0%
accuracy. The thalamus, putamen, pallidum and hippocampus are particularly
affected. Their involvement predicts TBI disease progression.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.media.2014.12.003 
PMID: 25596765  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Med Eng Phys. 2015 Jan;37(1):68-76. doi: 10.1016/j.medengphy.2014.10.009. Epub
2014 Nov 10.

Detection of physical activities using a physical activity monitor system for
wheelchair users.

Hiremath SV(1), Intille SS(2), Kelleher A(3), Cooper RA(4), Ding D(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Human Engineering Research Laboratories, VA
Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; Department of
Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA,
United States.
(2)College of Computer and Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, 
MA, United States; Department of Health Sciences, Northeastern University,
Boston, MA, United States.
(3)Department of Veterans Affairs, Human Engineering Research Laboratories, VA
Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; Department of
Rehabilitation Science and Technology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 
United States.
(4)Department of Veterans Affairs, Human Engineering Research Laboratories, VA
Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; Department of
Rehabilitation Science and Technology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 
United States; Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States.
(5)Department of Veterans Affairs, Human Engineering Research Laboratories, VA
Pittsburgh Healthcare System, Pittsburgh, PA, United States; Department of
Rehabilitation Science and Technology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, 
United States; Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA, United States. Electronic address: dad5@pitt.edu.

Availability of physical activity monitors for wheelchair users can potentially
assist these individuals to track regular physical activity (PA), which in turn
could lead to a healthier and more active lifestyle. Therefore, the aim of this
study was to develop and validate algorithms for a physical activity monitoring
system (PAMS) to detect wheelchair based activities. The PAMS consists of a
gyroscope based wheel rotation monitor (G-WRM) and an accelerometer device
(wocket) worn on the upper arm or on the wrist. A total of 45 persons with spinal
cord injury took part in the study, which was performed in a structured
university-based laboratory environment, a semi-structured environment at the
National Veterans Wheelchair Games, and in the participants' home environments.
Participants performed at least ten PAs, other than resting, taken from a list of
PAs. The classification performance for the best classifiers on the testing
dataset for PAMS-Arm (G-WRM and wocket on upper arm) and PAMS-Wrist (G-WRM and
wocket on wrist) was 89.26% and 88.47%, respectively. The outcomes of this study 
indicate that multi-modal information from the PAMS can help detect various types
of wheelchair-based activities in structured laboratory, semi-structured
organizational, and unstructured home environments.

Copyright © 2014 IPEM. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.medengphy.2014.10.009 
PMID: 25465284  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Comput Biol Med. 2015 Jan;56:167-74. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2014.11.007. Epub 
2014 Nov 15.

Permutation entropy analysis of vital signs data for outcome prediction of
patients with severe traumatic brain injury.

Kalpakis K(1), Yang S(2), Hu PF(2), Mackenzie CF(2), Stansbury LG(2), Stein
DM(2), Scalea TM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science and Electric Engineering, University of
Maryland, Baltimore County, MD 21250, United States. Electronic address:
kalpakis@umbc.edu.
(2)University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, United States.

Permutation entropy is computationally efficient, robust to outliers, and
effective to measure complexity of time series. We used this technique to
quantify the complexity of continuous vital signs recorded from patients with
traumatic brain injury (TBI). Using permutation entropy calculated from early
vital signs (initial 10-20% of patient hospital stay time), we built classifiers 
to predict in-hospital mortality and mobility, measured by 3-month Extended
Glasgow Outcome Score (GOSE). Sixty patients with severe TBI produced a skewed
dataset that we evaluated for accuracy, sensitivity and specificity. The overall 
prediction accuracy achieved 91.67% for mortality, and 76.67% for 3-month GOSE in
testing datasets, using the leave-one-out cross validation. We also applied
Receiver Operating Characteristic analysis to compare classifiers built from
different learning methods. Those results support the applicability of
permutation entropy in analyzing the dynamic behavior of TBI vital signs for
early prediction of mortality and long-term patient outcomes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2014.11.007 
PMID: 25464358  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Bone Miner Res. 2014 Jul;29(7):1681-90. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2193.

Predictors of excess mortality after fracture: a population-based cohort study.

Melton LJ 3rd(1), Atkinson EJ, St Sauver JL, Achenbach SJ, Therneau TM, Rocca WA,
Amin S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, USA.

To determine the extent to which excess mortality after fractures attributable to
particular causes at specific skeletal sites can be predicted using data about
all medical diagnoses, we conducted a historical cohort study among 1991 Olmsted 
County, Minnesota, residents aged ≥ 50 years who experienced any fracture in 1989
to 1991 and who were followed passively for up to 22 years for death from any
cause. We used a machine learning approach, gradient boosting machine (GBM)
modeling, to determine whether the comorbid conditions present at the time of
fracture and those that arose subsequently could, in aggregate, identify patients
at the greatest increased risk of death. During 21,867 person-years of follow-up,
1245 deaths were observed when 1061 were expected (standardized mortality ratio, 
1.2; 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.1-1.2). Patients presented with a median
history of 26 comorbid conditions each as assessed by the Clinical Classification
Software system and 57 each over the total duration of follow-up. Using all
available information, the excess deaths could be predicted with good accuracy
(c-index ≥ 0.80) in 89% of the GBM models built for patients with different types
of fracture; in one-third of the models, the c-index was ≥ 0.90. The conditions
most prominent in the GBM prediction models were also reflected in the specific
causes of death that were elevated, suggesting the influence of confounding on
the relationship. However, the predominant comorbid conditions were mainly those 
responsible for mortality in the general population, rather than the specific
diseases most closely associated with secondary osteoporosis. To reduce long-term
deaths in the fracture population as a whole, a more general approach to the
fracture patient is indicated.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

DOI: 10.1002/jbmr.2193 
PMCID: PMC4133107
PMID: 24677169  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Shock. 2014 May;41 Suppl 1:13-20. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000000096.

Challenges and possibilities in forward resuscitation.

Hooper TJ(1), De Pasquale M, Strandenes G, Sunde G, Ward KR.

Author information: 
(1)*UK Defence Medical Services, Anaesthetic Department, Frenchay Hospital, North
Bristol Trust, Bristol, United Kingdom; †Deployment Medicine International, Gig
Harbor, Washington; ‡Norwegian Naval Special Operation Commando, Department of
Immunology and Transfusion Medicine, and §The Norwegian Air Ambulance Foundation,
Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, Haukeland University Hospital,
Bergen, Norway; and ∥Michigan Center for Integrative Research in Critical Care
(MCIRCC), Department of Emergency Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan.

The environmental and logistical constraints of the prehospital setting make it a
challenging place for the treatment of trauma patients. This is perhaps more
pronounced in the management of battlefield casualties before extraction to
definitive care. In seeking solutions, interest has been renewed in implementing 
damage control resuscitation principles in the prehospital setting, a concept
termed remote damage control resuscitation. These developments, while improving
conflict survival rates, are not exclusive to the military environment, with
similar situations existing in the civilian setting. By understanding the
pathophysiology of shock, particularly the need for oxygen debt repayment,
improvements in the assessment and management of trauma patients can be made.
Technology gaps have previously hampered our ability to accurately monitor the
prehospital trauma patient in real time. However, this is changing, with devices 
such as tissue hemoglobin oxygen saturation monitors and point-of-care lactate
analysis currently being refined. Other monitoring modalities including newer
signal analysis and artificial intelligence techniques are also in development.
Advances in hemostatic resuscitation are being made as our understanding and
ability to effectively monitor patients improve. The reevaluation of whole-blood 
use in the prehospital environment is yielding favorable results and challenging 
the negative dogma currently associated with its use. Management of
trauma-related airway and respiratory compromise is evolving, with scope to
improve on currently accepted practices. The purpose of this review is to
highlight the challenges of treating patients in the prehospital setting and
suggest potential solutions. In doing so, we hope to maintain the enthusiasm from
people in the field and highlight areas for prehospital specific research and
development, so that improved rates of casualty survival will continue.

DOI: 10.1097/SHK.0000000000000096 
PMID: 24296432  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Acad Emerg Med. 2013 Aug;20(8):848-54. doi: 10.1111/acem.12174.

Automated outcome classification of emergency department computed tomography
imaging reports.

Yadav K(1), Sarioglu E, Smith M, Choi HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency Medicine, The George Washington University,
Washington, DC.

BACKGROUND: Reliably abstracting outcomes from free-text electronic health
records remains a challenge. While automated classification of free text has been
a popular medical informatics topic, performance validation using real-world
clinical data has been limited. The two main approaches are linguistic (natural
language processing [NLP]) and statistical (machine learning). The authors have
developed a hybrid system for abstracting computed tomography (CT) reports for
specified outcomes.
OBJECTIVES: The objective was to measure performance of a hybrid NLP and machine 
learning system for automated outcome classification of emergency department (ED)
CT imaging reports. The hypothesis was that such a system is comparable to
medical personnel doing the data abstraction.
METHODS: A secondary analysis was performed on a prior diagnostic imaging study
on 3,710 blunt facial trauma victims. Staff radiologists dictated CT reports as
free text, which were then deidentified. A trained data abstractor manually coded
the reference standard outcome of acute orbital fracture, with a random subset
double-coded for reliability. The data set was randomly split evenly into
training and testing sets. Training patient reports were used as input to the
Medical Language Extraction and Encoding (MedLEE) NLP tool to create structured
output containing standardized medical terms and modifiers for certainty and
temporal status. Findings were filtered for low certainty and past/future
modifiers and then combined with the manual reference standard to generate
decision tree classifiers using data mining tools Waikato Environment for
Knowledge Analysis (WEKA) 3.7.5 and Salford Predictive Miner 6.6. Performance of 
decision tree classifiers was evaluated on the testing set with or without NLP
processing.
RESULTS: The performance of machine learning alone was comparable to prior NLP
studies (sensitivity = 0.92, specificity = 0.93, precision = 0.95, recall = 0.93,
f-score = 0.94), and the combined use of NLP and machine learning showed further 
improvement (sensitivity = 0.93, specificity = 0.97, precision = 0.97, recall =
0.96, f-score = 0.97). This performance is similar to, or better than, that of
medical personnel in previous studies.
CONCLUSIONS: A hybrid NLP and machine learning automated classification system
shows promise in coding free-text electronic clinical data.

© 2013 by the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/acem.12174 
PMCID: PMC3898888
PMID: 24033628  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2013 Jul;75(1 Suppl 1):S53-60. doi:
10.1097/TA.0b013e3182914553.

Time-dependent prediction and evaluation of variable importance using
superlearning in high-dimensional clinical data.

Hubbard A(1), Munoz ID, Decker A, Holcomb JB, Schreiber MA, Bulger EM, Brasel KJ,
Fox EE, del Junco DJ, Wade CE, Rahbar MH, Cotton BA, Phelan HA, Myers JG, Alarcon
LH, Muskat P, Cohen MJ; PROMMTT Study Group.

Collaborators: Rahbar MH, Holcomb JB, Fox EE, del Junco DJ, Cotton BA, Wade CE,
Zhang J, Matijevic N, Bai Y, Wang W, Podbielski J, Duran SJ, Benjamin-Garner R,
Reynolds RJ, Zhang X, Dickerson A, Camp ES, Holcomb JB, Cotton BA, Elopre M,
Hatch QM, Scerbo M, Caga-Anan Z, White CE, Franzen KL, Coates EC, Brasel KJ,
Walsh P, Schreiber MA, Underwood SJ, Curren J, Cohen MJ, Knudson M, Nelson M,
Call MS, Muskat P, Johannigman JA, Robinson BR, Branson R, Gomaa D, Dahl C,
Alarcon LH, Peitzman AB, Stull SD, Kampmeyer M, Early BJ, Shnol HL, Zolin SJ,
Sears SB, Myers JG, Stewart RM, Sambucini RL, Gildea M, DeRosa M, Jonas R,
McCarthy J, Phelan HA, Minei JP, Carroll E, Bulger EM, Klotz P, Warner KJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Public Health, University of California-Berkeley, Berkeley,
California 94720, USA. hubbard@berkeley.edu

BACKGROUND: Prediction of outcome after injury is fraught with uncertainty and
statistically beset by misspecified models. Single-time point regression only
gives prediction and inference at one time, of dubious value for continuous
prediction of ongoing bleeding. New statistical machine learning techniques such 
as SuperLearner (SL) exist to make superior prediction at iterative time points
while evaluating the changing relative importance of each measured variable on an
outcome. This then can provide continuously changing prediction of outcome and
evaluation of which clinical variables likely drive a particular outcome.
METHODS: PROMMTT data were evaluated using both naive (standard stepwise logistic
regression) and SL techniques to develop a time-dependent prediction of future
mortality within discrete time intervals. We avoided both underfitting and
overfitting using cross validation to select an optimal combination of predictors
among candidate predictors/machine learning algorithms. SL was also used to
produce interval-specific robust measures of variable importance measures (VIM
resulting in an ordered list of variables, by time point) that have the strongest
impact on future mortality.
RESULTS: Nine hundred eighty patients had complete clinical and outcome data and 
were included in the analysis. The prediction of ongoing transfusion with SL was 
superior to the naive approach for all time intervals (correlations of
cross-validated predictions with the outcome were 0.819, 0.789, 0.792 for time
intervals 30-90, 90-180, 180-360, >360 minutes). The estimated VIM of mortality
also changed significantly at each time point.
CONCLUSION: The SL technique for prediction of outcome from a complex dynamic
multivariate data set is superior at each time interval to standard models. In
addition, the SL VIM at each time point provides insight into the time-specific
drivers of future outcome, patient trajectory, and targets for clinical
intervention. Thus, this automated approach mimics clinical practice, changing
form and content through time to optimize the accuracy of the prognosis based on 
the evolving trajectory of the patient.

DOI: 10.1097/TA.0b013e3182914553 
PMCID: PMC3744063
PMID: 23778512  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Med Biol Eng Comput. 2013 Sep;51(9):1059-67. doi: 10.1007/s11517-013-1091-0. Epub
2013 Jun 23.

Mortality prediction of rats in acute hemorrhagic shock using machine learning
techniques.

Kim KA(1), Choi JY, Yoo TK, Kim SK, Chung K, Kim DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Chungbuk National University, College of
Medicine, Cheongju, Korea.

This study sought to determine a mortality prediction model that could be used
for triage in the setting of acute hemorrhage from trauma. To achieve this aim,
various machine learning techniques were applied using the rat model in acute
hemorrhage. Thirty-six anesthetized rats were randomized into three groups
according to the volume of controlled blood loss. Measurements included heart
rate (HR), systolic and diastolic blood pressures (SBP and DBP), mean arterial
pressure, pulse pressure, respiratory rate, temperature, blood lactate
concentration (LC), peripheral perfusion (PP), shock index (SI, SI = HR/SBP), and
a new hemorrhage-induced severity index (NI, NI = LC/PP). NI was suggested as one
of the good candidates for mortality prediction variable in our previous study.
We constructed mortality prediction models with logistic regression (LR),
artificial neural networks (ANN), random forest (RF), and support vector machines
(SVM) with variable selection. The SVM model showed better sensitivity (1.000)
and area under curve (0.972) than the LR, ANN, and RF models for mortality
prediction. The important variables selected by the SVM were NI and LC. The SVM
model may be very helpful to first responders who need to make accurate triage
decisions and rapidly treat hemorrhagic patients in cases of trauma.

DOI: 10.1007/s11517-013-1091-0 
PMID: 23793529  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Occup Rehabil. 2013 Dec;23(4):597-609. doi: 10.1007/s10926-013-9430-4.

Development of a computer-based clinical decision support tool for selecting
appropriate rehabilitation interventions for injured workers.

Gross DP(1), Zhang J, Steenstra I, Barnsley S, Haws C, Amell T, McIntosh G,
Cooper J, Zaiane O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, University of Alberta, 2-50 Corbett Hall,
Edmonton, AB, T6G 2G4, Canada, dgross@ualberta.ca.

PURPOSE: To develop a classification algorithm and accompanying computer-based
clinical decision support tool to help categorize injured workers toward optimal 
rehabilitation interventions based on unique worker characteristics.
METHODS: Population-based historical cohort design. Data were extracted from a
Canadian provincial workers' compensation database on all claimants undergoing
work assessment between December 2009 and January 2011. Data were available on:
(1) numerous personal, clinical, occupational, and social variables; (2) type of 
rehabilitation undertaken; and (3) outcomes following rehabilitation (receiving
time loss benefits or undergoing repeat programs). Machine learning, concerned
with the design of algorithms to discriminate between classes based on empirical 
data, was the foundation of our approach to build a classification system with
multiple independent and dependent variables.
RESULTS: The population included 8,611 unique claimants. Subjects were
predominantly employed (85 %) males (64 %) with diagnoses of sprain/strain (44
%). Baseline clinician classification accuracy was high (ROC = 0.86) for
selecting programs that lead to successful return-to-work. Classification
performance for machine learning techniques outperformed the clinician baseline
classification (ROC = 0.94). The final classifiers were multifactorial and
included the variables: injury duration, occupation, job attachment status, work 
status, modified work availability, pain intensity rating, self-rated
occupational disability, and 9 items from the SF-36 Health Survey.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of machine learning classification techniques appears to
have resulted in classification performance better than clinician
decision-making. The final algorithm has been integrated into a computer-based
clinical decision support tool that requires additional validation in a clinical 
sample.

DOI: 10.1007/s10926-013-9430-4 
PMID: 23468410  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Ann Neurol. 2013 Apr;73(4):489-99. doi: 10.1002/ana.23824. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Individual prediction of white matter injury following traumatic brain injury.

Hellyer PJ(1), Leech R, Ham TE, Bonnelle V, Sharp DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Computational, Cognitive, and Clinical Neuroimaging Laboratory, Division of
Experimental Medicine, London, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: Traumatic brain injury (TBI) often results in traumatic axonal injury 
(TAI). This can be difficult to identify using conventional imaging. Diffusion
tensor imaging (DTI) offers a method of assessing axonal damage in vivo, but has 
previously mainly been used to investigate groups of patients. Machine learning
techniques are increasingly used to improve diagnosis based on complex imaging
measures. We investigated whether machine learning applied to DTI data can be
used to diagnose white matter damage after TBI and to predict neuropsychological 
outcome in individual patients.
METHODS: We trained pattern classifiers to predict the presence of white matter
damage in 25 TBI patients with microbleed evidence of TAI compared to
neurologically healthy age-matched controls. We then applied these classifiers to
35 additional patients with no conventional imaging evidence of TAI. Finally, we 
used regression analyses to predict indices of neuropsychological outcome for
information processing speed, executive function, and associative memory in a
group of 70 heterogeneous patients.
RESULTS: The classifiers discriminated between patients with microbleeds and
age-matched controls with a high degree of accuracy, and outperformed other
methods. When the trained classifiers were applied to patients without
microbleeds, patients having likely TAI showed evidence of greater cognitive
impairment in information processing speed and executive function. The
classifiers were also able to predict the extent of impairments in information
processing speed and executive function.
INTERPRETATION: The work provides a proof of principle that multivariate
techniques can be used with DTI to provide diagnostic information about
clinically significant TAI.

Copyright © 2012 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.23824 
PMID: 23426980  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2012;2012:4648-51. doi:
10.1109/EMBC.2012.6347003.

Towards an intelligent system for clinical guidance on wheelchair tilt and
recline usage.

Fu J(1), Wiechmann P, Jan YK, Jones M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Central Oklahoma, Edmond, OK 73034, USA. jfu@uco.edu

We propose to construct an intelligent system for clinical guidance on how to
effectively use power wheelchair tilt and recline functions. The motivations fall
into the following two aspects. (1) People with spinal cord injury (SCI) are
vulnerable to pressure ulcers. SCI can lead to structural and functional changes 
below the injury level that may predispose individuals to tissue breakdown. As a 
result, pressure ulcers can significantly affect the quality of life, including
pain, infection, altered body image, and even mortality. (2) Clinically,
wheelchair power seat function, i.e., tilt and recline, is recommended for
relieving sitting-induced pressures. The goal is to increase skin blood flow for 
the ischemic soft tissues to avoid irreversible damage. Due to variations in the 
level and completeness of SCI, the effectiveness of using wheelchair tilt and
recline to reduce pressure ulcer risks has considerable room for improvement. Our
previous study indicated that the blood flow of people with SCI may respond very 
differently to wheelchair tilt and recline settings. In this study, we propose to
use the artificial neural network (ANN) to predict how wheelchair power seat
functions affect blood flow response to seating pressure. This is regression
learning because the predicted outputs are numerical values. Besides the
challenging nature of regression learning, ANN may suffer from the overfitting
problem which, when occurring, leads to poor predictive quality (i.e., cannot
generalize). We propose using the particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm to 
train ANN to mitigate the impact of overfitting so that ANN can make correct
predictions on both existing and new data. Experimental results show that the
proposed approach is promising to improve ANN's predictive quality for new data.

DOI: 10.1109/EMBC.2012.6347003 
PMID: 23366964  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Biomed Tech (Berl). 2013 Feb;58(1):1-11. doi: 10.1515/bmt-2012-0090.

Design and implementation of a control system reflecting the level of analgesia
during general anesthesia.

Janda M(1), Schubert A, Bajorat J, Hofmockel R, Nöldge-Schomburg GF, Lampe BP,
Simanski O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Intensive Care Medicine, University of
Rostock, Rostock, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: Measuring and ensuring an adequate level of analgesia in patients
are of increasing interest in the area of automated drug delivery during general 
anesthesia. Therefore, the aim of this investigation was to develop a control
system that may reflect the intraoperative analgesia value. Our hypothesis was
that a feedback controller could be applied in clinical practice safely and at an
adequate quality of analgesia. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the
practical feasibility of such a system in a clinical setting.
METHODS: The control system for the level of analgesia described in this paper
relies on a parameter combination of heart rate variability (HRV), heart rate
(HR), and blood pressure (mean arterial pressure, MAP), which serve as input
variables for an expert system. For this fuzzy system, the experience of the
participating anesthesiologists was translated into a set of fuzzy rules. In a
pilot trial, the control system for automated titration of remifentanil, a
short-acting opioid, was tested combined with a closed-loop propofol infusion
system for hypnosis. Ten adult patients (4 women, 6 men), aged 22-52 years
(median, 45 years; range, 29-49 years), with an American Society of
Anesthesiologists physical status class I or II and who were scheduled for
elective trauma surgery in a supine position were enrolled in this prospective
trial. The precision of the system was calculated using internationally defined
performance parameters.
RESULTS: There was no human intervention necessary during the computer-controlled
administration of propofol and remifentanil, and operating conditions were
satisfactory in all patients. All patients assessed the quality of anesthesia as 
"good" to "very good". Median performance error, median absolute performance
error, and wobble for HR and MAP during maintenance of anesthesia were -8.98
(5.32), 10.08 (4.17), and 2.68 (1.29) and -4.51 (12.73), 13.63 (2.27), and 3.90
(2.08) [mean (SD)], respectively.
CONCLUSION: The control system, reflecting the level of analgesia during general 
anesthesia designed and evaluated in this study, allows for a clinically
practical, nearly fully automated infusion of an opioid during medium-length
surgical procedures with acceptable technical requirements and an adequate
precision.

DOI: 10.1515/bmt-2012-0090 
PMID: 23314499  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Crit Care Med. 2013 Feb;41(2):554-64. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3182742d0a.

Novel methods to predict increased intracranial pressure during intensive care
and long-term neurologic outcome after traumatic brain injury: development and
validation in a multicenter dataset.

Güiza F(1), Depreitere B, Piper I, Van den Berghe G, Meyfroidt G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Intensive Care Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
fabian.guiza@med.kuleuven.be

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2013 Feb;41(2):688.

OBJECTIVE: Intracranial pressure monitoring is standard of care after severe
traumatic brain injury. Episodes of increased intracranial pressure are secondary
injuries associated with poor outcome. We developed a model to predict increased 
intracranial pressure episodes 30 mins in advance, by using the dynamic
characteristics of continuous intracranial pressure and mean arterial pressure
monitoring. In addition, we hypothesized that performance of current models to
predict long-term neurologic outcome could be substantially improved by adding
dynamic characteristics of continuous intracranial pressure and mean arterial
pressure monitoring during the first 24 hrs in the ICU.
DESIGN: Prognostic modeling. Noninterventional, observational, retrospective
study.
SETTING AND PATIENTS: The Brain Monitoring with Information Technology dataset
consisted of 264 traumatic brain injury patients admitted to 22 neuro-ICUs from
11 European countries.
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MEASUREMENTS: Predictive models were built with multivariate logistic regression 
and Gaussian processes, a machine learning technique. Predictive attributes were 
Corticosteroid Randomisation After Significant Head Injury-basic and
International Mission for Prognosis and Clinical Trial design in TBI-core
predictors, together with time-series summary statistics of minute-by-minute mean
arterial pressure and intracranial pressure.
MAIN RESULTS: Increased intracranial pressure episodes could be predicted 30 mins
ahead with good calibration (Hosmer-Lemeshow p value 0.12, calibration slope
1.02, calibration-in-the-large -0.02) and discrimination (area under the receiver
operating curve = 0.87) on an external validation dataset. Models for prediction 
of poor neurologic outcome at six months (Glasgow Outcome Score 1-2) based only
on static admission data had 0.72 area under the receiver operating curve; adding
dynamic information of intracranial pressure and mean arterial pressure during
the first 24 hrs increased performance to 0.90. Similarly, prediction of Glasgow 
Outcome Score 1-3 was improved from 0.68 to 0.87 when including dynamic
information.
CONCLUSION: The dynamic information in continuous mean arterial pressure and
intracranial pressure monitoring allows to accurately predict increased
intracranial pressure in the neuro-ICU. Adding information of the first 24 hrs of
intracranial pressure and mean arterial pressure monitoring to known baseline
risk factors allows very accurate prediction of long-term neurologic outcome at 6
months.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e3182742d0a 
PMID: 23263587  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Ann Biomed Eng. 2013 Mar;41(3):562-76. doi: 10.1007/s10439-012-0691-4. Epub 2012 
Nov 22.

Surface curvature as a classifier of abdominal aortic aneurysms: a comparative
analysis.

Lee K(1), Zhu J, Shum J, Zhang Y, Muluk SC, Chandra A, Eskandari MK, Finol EA.

Author information: 
(1)Mechanical Engineering Department, Carnegie Mellon University, 5000 Forbes
Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

An abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) carries one of the highest mortality rates
among vascular diseases when it ruptures. To predict the role of surface
curvature in rupture risk assessment, a discriminatory analysis of aneurysm
geometry characterization was conducted. Data was obtained from 205
patient-specific computed tomography image sets corresponding to three AAA
population subgroups: patients under surveillance, those that underwent elective 
repair of the aneurysm, and those with an emergent repair. Each AAA was
reconstructed and their surface curvatures estimated using the biquintic Hermite 
finite element method. Local surface curvatures were processed into ten global
curvature indices. Statistical analysis of the data revealed that the L2-norm of 
the Gaussian and Mean surface curvatures can be utilized as classifiers of the
three AAA population subgroups. The application of statistical machine learning
on the curvature features yielded 85.5% accuracy in classifying electively and
emergent repaired AAAs, compared to a 68.9% accuracy obtained by using maximum
aneurysm diameter alone. Such combination of non-invasive geometric
quantification and statistical machine learning methods can be used in a clinical
setting to assess the risk of rupture of aneurysms during regular patient
follow-ups.

DOI: 10.1007/s10439-012-0691-4 
PMCID: PMC3600104
PMID: 23180028  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Neurotrauma. 2012 Nov 20;29(17):2613-24. doi: 10.1089/neu.2012.2468. Epub 2012 
Nov 14.

Multivariate outcome prediction in traumatic brain injury with focus on
laboratory values.

Nelson DW(1), Rudehill A, MacCallum RM, Holst A, Wanecek M, Weitzberg E,
Bellander BM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Section of Anesthesiology and
Intensive Care, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
david.nelson@karolinska.se

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a major cause of morbidity and mortality.
Identifying factors relevant to outcome can provide a better understanding of TBI
pathophysiology, in addition to aiding prognostication. Many common laboratory
variables have been related to outcome but may not be independent predictors in a
multivariate setting. In this study, 757 patients were identified in the
Karolinska TBI database who had retrievable early laboratory variables. These
were analyzed towards a dichotomized Glasgow Outcome Scale (GOS) with logistic
regression and relevance vector machines, a non-linear machine learning method,
univariately and controlled for the known important predictors in TBI outcome:
age, Glasgow Coma Score (GCS), pupil response, and computed tomography (CT)
score. Accuracy was assessed with Nagelkerke's pseudo R². Of the 18 investigated 
laboratory variables, 15 were found significant (p<0.05) towards outcome in
univariate analyses. In contrast, when adjusting for other predictors, few
remained significant. Creatinine was found an independent predictor of TBI
outcome. Glucose, albumin, and osmolarity levels were also identified as
predictors, depending on analysis method. A worse outcome related to increasing
osmolarity may warrant further study. Importantly, hemoglobin was not found
significant when adjusted for post-resuscitation GCS as opposed to an admission
GCS, and timing of GCS can thus have a major impact on conclusions. In total,
laboratory variables added an additional 1.3-4.4% to pseudo R².

DOI: 10.1089/neu.2012.2468 
PMID: 22994879  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Trauma Acute Care Surg. 2012 Aug;73(2):419-24; discussion 424-5. doi:
10.1097/TA.0b013e31825ff59a.

Computational gene mapping to analyze continuous automated physiologic monitoring
data in neuro-trauma intensive care.

Stein DM(1), Hu PF, Chen HH, Yang S, Stansbury LG, Scalea TM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Maryland School of Medicine, R Adams Cowley Shock Trauma Center,
Shock Trauma and Anesthesia Research Center, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

BACKGROUND: We asked whether the advanced machine learning applications used in
microarray gene profiling could assess critical thresholds in the massive
databases generated by continuous electronic physiologic vital signs (VS)
monitoring in the neuro-trauma intensive care unit.
METHODS: We used Class Prediction Analysis to predict binary outcomes
(life/death, good/bad Extended Glasgow Outcome Score, etc.) based on data accrued
within 12, 24, 48, and 72 hours after admission to the neuro-trauma intensive
care unit. Univariate analyses selected "features," discriminator VS segments or 
"genes," in each individual's data set. Prediction models using these selected
features were then constructed using six different statistical modeling
techniques to predict outcome for other individuals in the sample cohort based on
the selected features of each individual then cross-validated with a
leave-one-out method.
RESULTS: We gleaned complete sets of 588 VS monitoring segment features for each 
of four periods and outcomes from 52 of 60 patients with severe traumatic brain
injury who met study inclusion criteria. Overall, intracranial pressures and
blood pressures over time (e.g., intracranial pressure >20 mm Hg for 20 minutes) 
provided the best discrimination for outcomes. Modeling performed best in the
first 12 hours of care and for mortality. The mean number of selected features
included 76 predicting 14-day hospital stay in that period, 11 predicting
mortality, and 4 predicting 3-month Extended Glasgow Outcome Score. Four of the
six techniques constructed models that correctly identified mortality by 12 hours
75% of the time or higher.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that valid prediction models after severe
traumatic brain injury can be constructed using gene mapping techniques to
analyze large data sets from conventional electronic monitoring data, but that
this methodology needs validation in larger data sets, and that additional
unstructured learning techniques may also prove useful.

DOI: 10.1097/TA.0b013e31825ff59a 
PMID: 22846949  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biom J. 2012 Sep;54(5):674-85. doi: 10.1002/bimj.201200026. Epub 2012 Jun 19.

Discrimination ability of prediction models for ordinal outcomes: relationships
between existing measures and a new measure.

Van Calster B(1), Van Belle V, Vergouwe Y, Steyerberg EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development, and Regeneration, KU Leuven--University of Leuven, 
Herestraat 49 box 7003, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium. ben.vancalster@med.kuleuven.be

In this paper, we focus on measures to evaluate discrimination of prediction
models for ordinal outcomes. We review existing extensions of the dichotomous
c-index-which is equivalent to the area under the receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve--suggest a new measure, and study their relationships.
The volume under the ROC surface (VUS) scores sets of cases including one case
from each outcome category. VUS considers sets as either correctly or incorrectly
ordered by the model. All other existing measures assess pairs of cases. We
propose an ordinal c-index (ORC) that is set-based but, contrary to VUS, scores
sets more gradually by indicating the closeness of the model-based ordering to
the perfect ordering. As a result, the ORC does not decrease rapidly as the
number of outcome categories increases. It turns out that the ORC can be
rewritten as the average of pairwise c-indexes. Hence, the ORC has both a set-
and pair-based interpretation. There are several relationships between the
existing measures, leading to only two types of existing measures: a
prevalence-weighted average of pairwise c-indexes and the VUS. Our suggested
measure ORC positions itself in between as it is set-based but turns out to equal
an unweighted average of pairwise c-indexes. The measures are demonstrated
through a case study on the prediction of six-month outcome after traumatic brain
injury. In conclusion, the set-based nature and graded scoring system make the
ORC an attractive measure with a simple interpretation, together with its
prevalence-independence that is a natural property of a discrimination measure.

© 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/bimj.201200026 
PMID: 22711459  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036556. Epub 2012 May 7.

Fall classification by machine learning using mobile phones.

Albert MV(1), Kording K, Herrmann M, Jayaraman A.

Author information: 
(1)Sensory Motor Performance Program, Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois, USA. mark@mva.me

Fall prevention is a critical component of health care; falls are a common source
of injury in the elderly and are associated with significant levels of mortality 
and morbidity. Automatically detecting falls can allow rapid response to
potential emergencies; in addition, knowing the cause or manner of a fall can be 
beneficial for prevention studies or a more tailored emergency response. The
purpose of this study is to demonstrate techniques to not only reliably detect a 
fall but also to automatically classify the type. We asked 15 subjects to
simulate four different types of falls-left and right lateral, forward trips, and
backward slips-while wearing mobile phones and previously validated, dedicated
accelerometers. Nine subjects also wore the devices for ten days, to provide data
for comparison with the simulated falls. We applied five machine learning
classifiers to a large time-series feature set to detect falls. Support vector
machines and regularized logistic regression were able to identify a fall with
98% accuracy and classify the type of fall with 99% accuracy. This work
demonstrates how current machine learning approaches can simplify data collection
for prevention in fall-related research as well as improve rapid response to
potential injuries due to falls.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036556 
PMCID: PMC3346841
PMID: 22586477  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Int J Comput Assist Radiol Surg. 2012 May;7(3):401-11. doi:
10.1007/s11548-011-0643-8. Epub 2011 Jul 29.

Case-based fracture image retrieval.

Zhou X(1), Stern R, Müller H.

Author information: 
(1)Geneva University Hospitals and University of Geneva (HUG), Rue
Gabrielle-Perret-Gentil 4, Geneva, Switzerland. xin.zhou@unige.ch

PURPOSE: Case-based fracture image retrieval can assist surgeons in decisions
regarding new cases by supplying visually similar past cases. This tool may guide
fracture fixation and management through comparison of long-term outcomes in
similar cases.
METHODS: A fracture image database collected over 10 years at the orthopedic
service of the University Hospitals of Geneva was used. This database contains
2,690 fracture cases associated with 43 classes (based on the AO/OTA
classification). A case-based retrieval engine was developed and evaluated using 
retrieval precision as a performance metric. Only cases in the same class as the 
query case are considered as relevant. The scale-invariant feature transform
(SIFT) is used for image analysis. Performance evaluation was computed in terms
of mean average precision (MAP) and early precision (P10, P30). Retrieval results
produced with the GNU image finding tool (GIFT) were used as a baseline. Two
sampling strategies were evaluated. One used a dense 40 × 40 pixel grid sampling,
and the second one used the standard SIFT features. Based on dense pixel grid
sampling, three unsupervised feature selection strategies were introduced to
further improve retrieval performance. With dense pixel grid sampling, the image 
is divided into 1,600 (40 × 40) square blocks. The goal is to emphasize the
salient regions (blocks) and ignore irrelevant regions. Regions are considered as
important when a high variance of the visual features is found. The first
strategy is to calculate the variance of all descriptors on the global database. 
The second strategy is to calculate the variance of all descriptors for each
case. A third strategy is to perform a thumbnail image clustering in a first step
and then to calculate the variance for each cluster. Finally, a fusion between a 
SIFT-based system and GIFT is performed.
RESULTS: A first comparison on the selection of sampling strategies using SIFT
features shows that dense sampling using a pixel grid (MAP = 0.18) outperformed
the SIFT detector-based sampling approach (MAP = 0.10). In a second step, three
unsupervised feature selection strategies were evaluated. A grid parameter search
is applied to optimize parameters for feature selection and clustering. Results
show that using half of the regions (700 or 800) obtains the best performance for
all three strategies. Increasing the number of clusters in clustering can also
improve the retrieval performance. The SIFT descriptor variance in each case gave
the best indication of saliency for the regions (MAP = 0.23), better than the
other two strategies (MAP = 0.20 and 0.21). Combining GIFT (MAP = 0.23) and the
best SIFT strategy (MAP = 0.23) produced significantly better results (MAP =
0.27) than each system alone.
CONCLUSIONS: A case-based fracture retrieval engine was developed and is
available for online demonstration. SIFT is used to extract local features, and
three feature selection strategies were introduced and evaluated. A baseline
using the GIFT system was used to evaluate the salient point-based approaches.
Without supervised learning, SIFT-based systems with optimized parameters
slightly outperformed the GIFT system. A fusion of the two approaches shows that 
the information contained in the two approaches is complementary. Supervised
learning on the feature space is foreseen as the next step of this study.

DOI: 10.1007/s11548-011-0643-8 
PMID: 21800188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Crit Care. 2011 Jun 20;15(3):R149. doi: 10.1186/cc10274.

Development and validation of a novel molecular biomarker diagnostic test for the
early detection of sepsis.

Sutherland A(1), Thomas M, Brandon RA, Brandon RB, Lipman J, Tang B, McLean A,
Pascoe R, Price G, Nguyen T, Stone G, Venter D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunobiology and Bioinformatics, Athlomics Pty Ltd, Jephson
Street, Toowong, QLD 4066, Australia. Allison.Sutherland@athlomics.com

INTRODUCTION: Sepsis is a complex immunological response to infection
characterized by early hyper-inflammation followed by severe and protracted
immunosuppression, suggesting that a multi-marker approach has the greatest
clinical utility for early detection, within a clinical environment focused on
Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS) differentiation. Pre-clinical
research using an equine sepsis model identified a panel of gene expression
biomarkers that define the early aberrant immune activation. Thus, the primary
objective was to apply these gene expression biomarkers to distinguish patients
with sepsis from those who had undergone major open surgery and had clinical
outcomes consistent with systemic inflammation due to physical trauma and wound
healing.
METHODS: This was a multi-centre, prospective clinical trial conducted across
four tertiary critical care settings in Australia. Sepsis patients were recruited
if they met the 1992 Consensus Statement criteria and had clinical evidence of
systemic infection based on microbiology diagnoses (n = 27). Participants in the 
post-surgical (PS) group were recruited pre-operatively and blood samples
collected within 24 hours following surgery (n = 38). Healthy controls (HC)
included hospital staff with no known concurrent illnesses (n = 20). Each
participant had minimally 5 ml of PAXgene blood collected for leucocyte RNA
isolation and gene expression analyses. Affymetrix array and multiplex tandem
(MT)-PCR studies were conducted to evaluate transcriptional profiles in
circulating white blood cells applying a set of 42 molecular markers that had
been identified a priori. A LogitBoost algorithm was used to create a machine
learning diagnostic rule to predict sepsis outcomes.
RESULTS: Based on preliminary microarray analyses comparing HC and sepsis groups,
a panel of 42-gene expression markers were identified that represented key innate
and adaptive immune function, cell cycling, WBC differentiation, extracellular
remodelling and immune modulation pathways. Comparisons against GEO data
confirmed the definitive separation of the sepsis cohort. Quantitative PCR
results suggest the capacity for this test to differentiate severe systemic
inflammation from HC is 92%. The area under the curve (AUC) receiver operator
characteristics (ROC) curve findings demonstrated sepsis prediction within a
mixed inflammatory population, was between 86 and 92%.
CONCLUSIONS: This novel molecular biomarker test has a clinically relevant
sensitivity and specificity profile, and has the capacity for early detection of 
sepsis via the monitoring of critical care patients.

DOI: 10.1186/cc10274 
PMCID: PMC3219023
PMID: 21682927  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Crit Care Med. 2011 May;39(5):952-60. doi: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31820a92c6.

Multiparameter Intelligent Monitoring in Intensive Care II: a public-access
intensive care unit database.

Saeed M(1), Villarroel M, Reisner AT, Clifford G, Lehman LW, Moody G, Heldt T,
Kyaw TH, Moody B, Mark RG.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2011 May;39(5):1200-1.

OBJECTIVE: We sought to develop an intensive care unit research database applying
automated techniques to aggregate high-resolution diagnostic and therapeutic data
from a large, diverse population of adult intensive care unit patients. This
freely available database is intended to support epidemiologic research in
critical care medicine and serve as a resource to evaluate new clinical decision 
support and monitoring algorithms.
DESIGN: Data collection and retrospective analysis.
SETTING: All adult intensive care units (medical intensive care unit, surgical
intensive care unit, cardiac care unit, cardiac surgery recovery unit) at a
tertiary care hospital.
PATIENTS: Adult patients admitted to intensive care units between 2001 and 2007.
INTERVENTIONS: None.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: The Multiparameter Intelligent Monitoring in
Intensive Care II (MIMIC-II) database consists of 25,328 intensive care unit
stays. The investigators collected detailed information about intensive care unit
patient stays, including laboratory data, therapeutic intervention profiles such 
as vasoactive medication drip rates and ventilator settings, nursing progress
notes, discharge summaries, radiology reports, provider order entry data,
International Classification of Diseases, 9th Revision codes, and, for a subset
of patients, high-resolution vital sign trends and waveforms. Data were
automatically deidentified to comply with Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act standards and integrated with relational database software to 
create electronic intensive care unit records for each patient stay. The data
were made freely available in February 2010 through the Internet along with a
detailed user's guide and an assortment of data processing tools. The overall
hospital mortality rate was 11.7%, which varied by critical care unit. The median
intensive care unit length of stay was 2.2 days (interquartile range, 1.1-4.4
days). According to the primary International Classification of Diseases, 9th
Revision codes, the following disease categories each comprised at least 5% of
the case records: diseases of the circulatory system (39.1%); trauma (10.2%);
diseases of the digestive system (9.7%); pulmonary diseases (9.0%); infectious
diseases (7.0%); and neoplasms (6.8%).
CONCLUSIONS: MIMIC-II documents a diverse and very large population of intensive 
care unit patient stays and contains comprehensive and detailed clinical data,
including physiological waveforms and minute-by-minute trends for a subset of
records. It establishes a new public-access resource for critical care research, 
supporting a diverse range of analytic studies spanning epidemiology, clinical
decision-rule development, and electronic tool development.

DOI: 10.1097/CCM.0b013e31820a92c6 
PMCID: PMC3124312
PMID: 21283005  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2011 Feb;33(2):296-305. doi: 10.1002/jmri.22432.

Support vector machine multiparametric MRI identification of pseudoprogression
from tumor recurrence in patients with resected glioblastoma.

Hu X(1), Wong KK, Young GS, Guo L, Wong ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Center for Bioengineering and Informatics, The
Methodist Hospital Research Institute, The Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas,
USA.

PURPOSE: To automatically differentiate radiation necrosis from recurrent tumor
at high spatial resolution using multiparametric MRI features.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: MRI data retrieved from 31 patients (15 recurrent tumor
and 16 radiation necrosis) who underwent chemoradiation therapy after surgical
resection included post-gadolinium T1, T2, fluid-attenuated inversion recovery,
proton density, apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC), and perfusion-weighted
imaging (PWI) -derived relative cerebral blood volume (rCBV), relative cerebral
blood flow (rCBF), and mean transit time maps. After alignment to post contrast
T1WI, an eight-dimensional feature vector was constructed. An one-class-support
vector machine classifier was trained using a radiation necrosis training set.
Classifier parameters were optimized based on the area under receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve. The classifier was then tested on the full dataset.
RESULTS: The sensitivity and specificity of optimized classifier for
pseudoprogression was 89.91% and 93.72%, respectively. The area under ROC curve
was 0.9439. The distribution of voxels classified as radiation necrosis was
supported by the clinical interpretation of follow-up scans for both
nonprogressing and progressing test cases. The ADC map derived from
diffusion-weighted imaging and rCBV, rCBF derived from PWI were found to make a
greater contribution to the discrimination than the conventional images.
CONCLUSION: Machine learning using multiparametric MRI features may be a
promising approach to identify the distribution of radiation necrosis tissue in
resected glioblastoma multiforme patients undergoing chemoradiation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmri.22432 
PMCID: PMC3273302
PMID: 21274970  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Biomech. 2011 Jan 4;44(1):1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2010.08.012.

Objective grading of the pivot shift phenomenon using a support vector machine
approach.

Labbe DR(1), de Guise JA, Mezghani N, Godbout V, Grimard G, Baillargeon D,
Lavigne P, Fernandes J, Ranger P, Hagemeister N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de recherche en imagerie et orthopédie, Centre de recherche,
Centre hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal (CHUM), Montréal, Canada.
dlabbe@gmail.com

The pivot shift test is the only clinical test that has been shown to correlate
with subjective criteria of knee joint function following rupture of the anterior
cruciate ligament. The grade of the pivot shift is important in predicting short-
and long-term outcome. However, because this grade is established by a clinician 
in a subjective manner, the pivot shift's value as a clinical tool is reduced.
The purpose of this study was to develop a system that will objectively grade the
pivot shift test based on recorded knee joint kinematics. Fifty-six subjects with
different degrees of knee joint stability had the pivot shift test performed by
one of eight different orthopaedic surgeons while their knee joint kinematics
were recorded. A support vector machine based algorithm was used to objectively
classify these recordings according to a clinical grade. The grades established
by the surgeons were used as the gold standard for the development of the
classifier. There was substantial agreement between our classifier and the
surgeons in establishing the grade (weighted kappa=0.68). Seventy-one of 107
recordings (66%) were given the same grade and 96% of the time our classifier was
within one grade of that given by the surgeons. Moreover, grades 0 and 1 were
distinguished from grade 2 to 3 with 86% sensitivity and 90% specificity. Our
results show the feasibility of automatically grading the pivot shift in a manner
similar to that of an experienced clinician, based on knee joint kinematics.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2010.08.012 
PMID: 20810115  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2009;2009:2621-4. doi:
10.1109/IEMBS.2009.5335394.

Combining predictive capabilities of transcranial doppler with electrocardiogram 
to predict hemorrhagic shock.

Najarian K(1), Hakimzadeh R, Ward K, Daneshvar K, Ji SY.

Author information: 
(1)Computer Science, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23284, USA.
knajarin@vcu.edu

Hemorrhagic shock (HS) potentially impacts the chance of survival in most
traumatic injuries. Thus, it is highly desirable to maximize the survival rate in
cases of blood loss by predicting the occurrence of hemorrhagic shock with
biomedical signals. Since analyzing one physiological signal may not enough to
accurately predict blood loss severity, two types of physiological signals -
Electrocardiography (ECG) and Transcranial Doppler (TCD) - are used to discover
the degree of severity. In this study, these degrees are classified as mild,
moderate and severe, and also severe and non-severe. The data for this study were
generated using the human simulated model of hemorrhage, which is called lower
body negative pressure (LBNP). The analysis is done by applying discrete wavelet 
transformation (DWT). The wavelet-based features are defined using the detail and
approximate coefficients and machine learning algorithms are used for
classification. The objective of this study is to evaluate the improvement when
analyzing ECG and TCD physiological signals together to classify the severity of 
blood loss. The results of this study show a prediction accuracy of 85.9%
achieved by support vector machine in identifying severe/non-severe states.

DOI: 10.1109/IEMBS.2009.5335394 
PMID: 19965226  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2009;2009:892863. doi: 10.1155/2009/892863. Epub 2009 May
28.

Bioinformatics methods for learning radiation-induced lung inflammation from
heterogeneous retrospective and prospective data.

Spencer SJ(1), Bonnin DA, Deasy JO, Bradley JD, El Naqa I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Washington University Medical School, Saint 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Radiotherapy outcomes are determined by complex interactions between physical and
biological factors, reflecting both treatment conditions and underlying genetics.
Recent advances in radiotherapy and biotechnology provide new opportunities and
challenges for predicting radiation-induced toxicities, particularly radiation
pneumonitis (RP), in lung cancer patients. In this work, we utilize datamining
methods based on machine learning to build a predictive model of lung injury by
retrospective analysis of treatment planning archives. In addition, biomarkers
for this model are extracted from a prospective clinical trial that collects
blood serum samples at multiple time points. We utilize a 3-way proteomics
methodology to screen for differentially expressed proteins that are related to
RP. Our preliminary results demonstrate that kernel methods can capture nonlinear
dose-volume interactions, but fail to address missing biological factors. Our
proteomics strategy yielded promising protein candidates, but their role in RP as
well as their interactions with dose-volume metrics remain to be determined.

DOI: 10.1155/2009/892863 
PMCID: PMC2688763
PMID: 19704920  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Brain Inj. 2009 Jan;23(1):1-2. doi: 10.1080/02699050802595873.

The Glasgow outcome scale in vegetative state: a possible source of bias.

Pignolo L, Quintieri M, Sannita WG.

DOI: 10.1080/02699050802595873 
PMID: 19172447  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2009 Jan 14;9:2. doi: 10.1186/1472-6947-9-2.

A comparative analysis of multi-level computer-assisted decision making systems
for traumatic injuries.

Ji SY(1), Smith R, Huynh T, Najarian K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, Virginia Commonwealth University, 401 East
Main Street, Richmond, Virginia, USA. jisy@vcu.edu

BACKGROUND: This paper focuses on the creation of a predictive computer-assisted 
decision making system for traumatic injury using machine learning algorithms.
Trauma experts must make several difficult decisions based on a large number of
patient attributes, usually in a short period of time. The aim is to compare the 
existing machine learning methods available for medical informatics, and develop 
reliable, rule-based computer-assisted decision-making systems that provide
recommendations for the course of treatment for new patients, based on previously
seen cases in trauma databases. Datasets of traumatic brain injury (TBI) patients
are used to train and test the decision making algorithm. The work is also
applicable to patients with traumatic pelvic injuries.
METHODS: Decision-making rules are created by processing patterns discovered in
the datasets, using machine learning techniques. More specifically, CART and C4.5
are used, as they provide grammatical expressions of knowledge extracted by
applying logical operations to the available features. The resulting rule sets
are tested against other machine learning methods, including AdaBoost and SVM.
The rule creation algorithm is applied to multiple datasets, both with and
without prior filtering to discover significant variables. This filtering is
performed via logistic regression prior to the rule discovery process.
RESULTS: For survival prediction using all variables, CART outperformed the other
machine learning methods. When using only significant variables, neural networks 
performed best. A reliable rule-base was generated using combined C4.5/CART. The 
average predictive rule performance was 82% when using all variables, and
approximately 84% when using significant variables only. The average performance 
of the combined C4.5 and CART system using significant variables was 89.7% in
predicting the exact outcome (home or rehabilitation), and 93.1% in predicting
the ICU length of stay for airlifted TBI patients.
CONCLUSION: This study creates an efficient computer-aided rule-based system that
can be employed in decision making in TBI cases. The rule-bases apply methods
that combine CART and C4.5 with logistic regression to improve rule performance
and quality. For final outcome prediction for TBI cases, the resulting rule-bases
outperform systems that utilize all available variables.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6947-9-2 
PMCID: PMC2661076
PMID: 19144188  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Int Med Res. 2008 Nov-Dec;36(6):1363-70.

Infrared thermography based on artificial intelligence for carpal tunnel syndrome
diagnosis.

Jesensek Papez B(1), Palfy M, Turk Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, Medical Centre Maribor,
Maribor, Slovenia. breda.jesensek@ukc-mb.si

Thermography for the measurement of surface temperatures is well known in
industry, although is not established in medicine despite its safety, lack of
pain and invasiveness, easy reproducibility, and low running costs. Promising
results have been achieved in nerve entrapment syndromes, although thermography
has never represented a real alternative to electromyography. Here an attempt is 
described to improve the diagnosis of carpal tunnel syndrome with thermography
using a computer-based system employing artificial neural networks to analyse the
images. Method reliability was tested on 112 images (depicting the dorsal and
palmar sides of 26 healthy and 30 pathological hands), with the hand divided into
12 segments and compared relative to a reference. Palmar segments appeared to
have no beneficial influence on classification outcome, whereas dorsal segments
gave improved outcome with classification success rates near to or over 80%, and 
finger segments influenced by the median nerve appeared to be of greatest
importance. These are preliminary results from a limited number of images and
further research will be undertaken as our image database grows.

DOI: 10.1177/147323000803600625 
PMID: 19094447  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 2009 Mar;56(3):572-81. doi: 10.1109/TBME.2008.2009995.
Epub 2008 Dec 9.

A treatment outcome prediction model of visual field recovery using
self-organizing maps.

Guenther T(1), Mueller I, Preuss M, Kruse R, Sabel BA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Psychology, Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg
39120, Germany. tobias.guenther@med.ovgu.de

Brain injuries caused by stroke, trauma, or tumor often affect the visual system 
that leads to perceptual deficits. After intense visual stimulation of the
damaged visual field or its border region, recovery may be achieved in some
sectors of the visual field, but the extent of restoration is highly variable
between patients and is not homogeneously distributed in the visual field. We now
assess the visual field loss and its dynamics by perimetry, a standard diagnostic
procedure in medicine, to measure the detectability of visual stimuli in the
visual field. Subsequently, a treatment outcome prediction model (TOPM) has been 
developed, using features that were extracted from the baseline perimetric
charts. The features in the TOPM were either empirically associated with
treatment outcomes or were based on findings in the vision-restoration
literature. Among other classifiers, the self-organizing map (SOM) was selected
because it implicitly supports data exploration. Using a data pool of 52 patients
with visual field defects, the TOPM was constructed to predict areas of
improvement in the visual field topography. To evaluate the predictive validity
of the TOPM, we propose a method to calculate the receiver operating
characteristic graph, whereby the SOM is used in combination with a nearest
neighbor classifier. We discuss issues relevant for medical TOPMs, such as
appropriateness to the patient sample, clinical relevance, and incorporation of a
priori knowledge.

DOI: 10.1109/TBME.2008.2009995 
PMID: 19068421  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Nurs Scholarsh. 2008;40(2):144-50. doi: 10.1111/j.1547-5069.2008.00219.x.

Evaluation of injury databases as a preliminary step to developing a triage
decision rule.

Scheetz LJ(1), Zhang J, Kolassa JE, Allen P, Allen M.

Author information: 
(1)College of Nursing, New York University, New York, NY 10003, USA.
ljs13@nyu.edu

PURPOSE: To evaluate accessibility and appropriateness of the Crash Outcomes Data
Evaluation Systems (CODES) databases for prehospital trauma triage decision-rule 
development for people age 65 years and older.
DESIGN AND METHODS: This informatics feasibility study included five steps for
evaluating the accessibility of CODES databases. Eight criteria were used to
evaluate the appropriateness of these databases for older person prehospital
trauma triage decision-rule development.
FINDINGS: Only 4 of the 33 states funded for CODES database development released 
their data to the study team during the 13-month data-acquisition period.
Potential predictor variables (of life-threatening injury) and outcome variables 
(need for trauma center care) were identified for each database. Several
databases had large amounts of missing data. Codebooks were available but
descriptions of data validation procedures were unavailable.
CONCLUSIONS: At this time, limited access to and development of CODES databases
and missing data preclude the usefulness of these databases for older person
triage decision rule development. Although adequate funding must be appropriated 
for continued CODES development, and commitment from individual states is
essential, these databases offer great promise as a mechanism for decision-rule
development to guide triage decision-making. Investigators should systematically 
evaluate large databases before using them in secondary analyses for clinical
decision rule development.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Nurses participate in the planning, development, and
implementation of health information systems in various settings. They also
assume important roles in prehospital care as direct care providers, EMS
administrators, participants of local and state EMS councils where emergency care
problems are discussed and policies are formulated, and through use at state and 
federal levels.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1547-5069.2008.00219.x 
PMID: 18507569  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv. 2007;10(Pt 2):943-50.

Global registration of multiple point sets: feasibility and applications in
multi-fragment fracture fixation.

Moghari MH(1), Abolmaesumi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Queen's University, Canada.

An algorithm to globally register multiple 3D data sets (point sets) within a
general reference frame is proposed. The algorithm uses the Unscented Kalman
Filter algorithm to simultaneously compute the registration transformations that 
map the data sets together, and to calculate the variances of the registration
parameters. The data sets are either randomly generated, or collected from a set 
of fractured bone phantoms using Computed Tomography (CT) images. The algorithm
robustly converges for isotropic Gaussian noise that could have perturbed the
point coordinates in the data sets. It is also computationally efficient, and
enables real-time global registration of multiple data sets, with applications in
computer-assisted orthopaedic trauma surgery.


PMID: 18044659  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Semin Ultrasound CT MR. 2007 Apr;28(2):101-8.

Screening for blunt cerebrovascular injuries: the essential role of computed
tomography angiography.

Stengel D(1), Rademacher G, Hanson B, Ekkernkamp A, Mutze S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Clinical Research, Unfallkrankenhaus Berlin Trauma Center, Berlin, 
Germany. stengeldirk@aol.com

The implementation of aggressive diagnostics refuted the thesis that blunt
cerebrovascular injuries (BCVI) are rare events. Given the estimates from recent 
studies, the prevalence may be as high as 1 per 100 among blunt multiple trauma
patients. The morbidity and mortality of unrecognized and untreated BCVI is
exceptionally high and warrants distinct efforts to detect these injuries during 
the primary trauma survey. The primary goal is to detect BCVI before neurological
symptoms occur, and to introduce anticoagulation or antiplatelet therapy as
appropriate. Index injuries such as cervical spine fractures increase the prior
probability of disease, but are not helpful in ruling BCVI out. Computed
tomography angiography (CTA) may represent the screening tool of choice, although
there is still limited evidence about its accuracy. Pooled data from six studies 
(1368 patients) published between 2002 and 2006 suggest a sensitivity of 79% and 
a specificity of 97% in the trauma setting. In the two largest investigations, no
false negative results were observed. Further research is needed to determine the
efficacy of CTA for disclosing BCVI, and to evaluate the potential benefits to
patients.


PMID: 17432764  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Neurotrauma. 2007 Jan;24(1):136-46.

Hybrid outcome prediction model for severe traumatic brain injury.

Pang BC(1), Kuralmani V, Joshi R, Hongli Y, Lee KK, Ang BT, Li J, Leong TY, Ng I.

Author information: 
(1)Acute Brain Injury Research Laboratory, Department of Neurosurgery, National
Neuroscience Institute, 11 Jalan Tan Tock Seng, 308433 Singapore.

Numerous studies addressing different methods of head injury prognostication have
been published. Unfortunately, these studies often incorporate different head
injury prognostication models and study populations, thus making direct
comparison difficult, if not impossible. Furthermore, newer artificial
intelligence tools such as machine learning methods have evolved in the field of 
data analysis, alongside more traditional methods of analysis. This study targets
the development of a set of integrated prognostication model combining different 
classes of outcome and prognostic factors. Methodologies such as discriminant
analysis, logistic regression, decision tree, Bayesian network, and neural
network were employed in the study. Several prognostication models were developed
using prospectively collected data from 513 severe closed head-injured patients
admitted to the Neurocritical Unit at National Neuroscience Institute of
Singapore, from April 1999 to February 2003. The correlation between prognostic
factors at admission and outcome at 6 months following injury was studied.
Overfitting error, which may falsely distinguish different outcomes, was compared
graphically. Tenfold cross-validation technique, which reduces overfitting error,
was used to validate outcome prediction accuracy. The overall prediction accuracy
achieved ranged from 49.79% to 81.49%. Consistently high outcome prediction
accuracy was seen with logistic regression and decision tree. Combining both
logistic regression and decision tree models, a hybrid prediction model was then 
developed. This hybrid model would more accurately predict the 6-month
post-severe head injury outcome using baseline admission parameters.

DOI: 10.1089/neu.2006.0113 
PMID: 17263677  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biomech. 2006;39(5):973-9.

Using support vector machines to optimally classify rotator cuff strength data
and quantify post-operative strength in rotator cuff tear patients.

Silver AE(1), Lungren MP, Johnson ME, O'Driscoll SW, An KN, Hughes RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Michigan, Orthopaedic
Research Laboratories and MedSport, 24 Frank Lloyd Wright Drive, P. O. Box 391,
Ann Arbor, MI 48106-0391, USA.

Shoulder strength data are important for post-operative assessment of shoulder
function and have been used in diagnosis of rotator cuff pathology. Support
vector machines (SVM) employ complex analysis techniques to solve classification 
and regression problems. A SVM, a machine learning technique, can be used for
analysis and classification of shoulder strength data. The goals of this study
were to determine the diagnostic competency of SVM based on shoulder strength
data and to apply SVM analysis in efforts to derive a single representative
shoulder strength score. Data were taken from fourteen isometric shoulder
strength measurements of each shoulder (involved and uninvolved) in 45 rotator
cuff tear patients. SVM diagnostic proficiency was found to be comparable to
reported ultrasound values. Improvement of shoulder function was accurately
represented by a single score in pairwise comparison of the pre-operative and the
12 month post-operative group (P < 0.004). Thus, the SVM-based score may be a
promising metric for summarizing rotator cuff strength data.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbiomech.2005.01.011 
PMID: 16488235  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biomed Inform. 2006 Aug;39(4):389-400. Epub 2005 Nov 15.

Methods for reasoning from geometry about anatomic structures injured by
penetrating trauma.

Ogunyemi O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Decision Systems Group, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
oogunyemi@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

This paper presents the methods used for three-dimensional (3D) reasoning about
anatomic structures affected by penetrating trauma in TraumaSCAN-Web, a
platform-independent decision support system for evaluating the effects of
penetrating trauma to the chest and abdomen. In assessing outcomes for an injured
patient, TraumaSCAN-Web utilizes 3D models of anatomic structures and 3D models
of the regions of damage associated with stab and gunshot wounds to determine the
probability of injury to anatomic structures. Probabilities estimated from 3D
reasoning about affected anatomic structures serve as input to a Bayesian network
which calculates posterior probabilities of injury based on these initial
probabilities together with available information about patient signs, symptoms
and test results. In addition to displaying textual descriptions of conditions
arising from penetrating trauma to a patient, TraumaSCAN-Web allows users to
visualize the anatomy suspected of being injured in 3D, in this way providing a
guide to its reasoning process.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jbi.2005.10.005 
PMCID: PMC1550355
PMID: 16321576  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. IEEE Trans Neural Syst Rehabil Eng. 2005 Jun;13(2):147-52.

Functional restoration of elbow extension after spinal-cord injury using a neural
network-based synergistic FES controller.

Giuffrida JP(1), Crago PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Engineering, Cleveland Medical Devices Inc.,
Cleveland, OH 44103, USA. jgiuffrida@clevemed.com

Individuals with a C5/C6 spinal-cord injury (SCI) have paralyzed elbow extensors,
yet retain weak to strong voluntary control of elbow flexion and some shoulder
movements. They lack elbow extension, which is critical during activities of
daily living. This research focuses on the functional evaluation of a developed
synergistic controller employing remaining voluntary elbow flexor and shoulder
electromyography (EMG) to control elbow extension with functional electrical
stimulation (FES). Remaining voluntarily controlled upper extremity muscles were 
used to train an artificial neural network (ANN) to control stimulation of the
paralyzed triceps. Surface EMG was collected from SCI subjects while they
produced isometric endpoint force vectors of varying magnitude and direction
using triceps stimulation levels predicted by a biomechanical model. ANNs were
trained with the collected EMG and stimulation levels. We hypothesized that once 
trained and implemented in real-time, the synergistic controller would provide
several functional benefits. We anticipated the synergistic controller would
provide a larger range of endpoint force vectors, the ability to grade and
maintain forces, the ability to complete a functional overhead reach task, and
use less overall stimulation than a constant stimulation scheme.

DOI: 10.1109/TNSRE.2005.847375 
PMID: 16003892  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Crit Care Med. 2004 Dec;32(12):2428-36.

Cerebral microdialysis of patients with severe traumatic brain injury exhibits
highly individualistic patterns as visualized by cluster analysis with
self-organizing maps.

Nelson DW(1), Bellander BM, Maccallum RM, Axelsson J, Alm M, Wallin M, Weitzberg 
E, Rudehill A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anaesthesiology and Intensive care, Karolinska University
Hospital, Stockholm Sweden.

Comment in
    Crit Care Med. 2004 Dec;32(12):2551-2.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze patterns of cerebral microdialysis in patients with
traumatic brain injury and, with a neural network methodology, investigate
pattern relationships to intracranial pressure and cerebral perfusion pressure.
DESIGN: Retrospective.
SETTING: University hospital, adult neurosurgical intensive care unit.
PATIENTS: Twenty-six patients with severe traumatic brain injury. All consecutive
traumatic brain injured patients (Glasgow Coma Scale < or =8) with microdialysis 
monitoring, analyzing glutamate, lactate, pyruvate, and glucose in both penumbral
and nonpenumbral tissue.
INTERVENTIONS: None; patients received the unit's standard neurointensive care
procedure.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: We used 2084 hrs of complete microdialysis data
sets (eight markers) to train Kohonen self-organizing maps. The self-organizing
map algorithm is a data-clustering method that reduces high-dimensional
information to a two-dimensional representation on a grid (map), retaining local 
relationships in the data. Maps were colored (overlaid) for intracranial
pressure, cerebral perfusion pressure, and outcome, to explore relationships with
underlying microdialysis patterns. The maps exhibited a striking clustering of
patients, with unique microdialysis patterns that were recognizable throughout
the analysis period. This also held true for most microdialysis patterns
characteristic of ischemia. These patients with ischemic patterns can have good
outcomes, suggesting a disparity between microdialysis values and severity of
traumatic brain injury.
CONCLUSION: Using an artificial neural network-like clustering technique, Kohonen
self-organizing maps, we have shown that cerebral microdialysis, in traumatic
brain injury, exhibits strikingly individualistic patterns that are identifiable 
throughout the analysis period. Because patients form their own clusters,
microdialysis patterns, during periods of increased intracranial pressure or
decreased cerebral perfusion pressure, will be found within these clusters.
Consequently, no common pattern of microdialysis can be seen among patients
within the range of our data. We suggest that these individualistic patterns
reflect not only metabolic states of traumatic brain injury but also local
gradients seen with small volume sampling. Future investigation should focus on
relating these patterns, and movement within and from clusters, to metabolic
states of the complex pathophysiology of traumatic brain injury.

DOI: 10.1097/01.ccm.0000147688.08813.9c 
PMID: 15599147  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Methods Inf Med. 2001;40(5):392-6.

Induction of hypotheses concerning hip arthroplasty: a modified methodology for
medical research.

Stankovski V(1), Bratko I, Demsar J, Smrke D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Biomedical Engineering, University Medical Center, Ljubljana,
Slovenia. Vlado.Stankovski@uni-lj.si

OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study is to advocate a methodology for medical 
research that, in contrast to traditional medical methodology, exploits the
flexibility of machine learning and retains the kind of statistical tests that
are generally accepted in the medical field for the confirmation of hypotheses.
METHODS: First, the medical problem is defined and data for an observed
population are collected; then a machine learning tool is used to generate
hypotheses regarding the problem; finally, statistical methods are used to
determine the validity of the generated hypotheses.
RESULTS: To illustrate this approach, the problem of defining indications for hip
arthroplasty after an acute medial femoral neck fracture is investigated as a
case study.
CONCLUSIONS: The methodology is similar to the usual style of applying machine
learning, but insists on a link to the techniques of statistical tests that are
normally used in medicine. It aims at a more flexible and economical use of
experimental data than in the usual medical research, which is enabled by
techniques of machine learning. At the same time, by reference to traditional
statistical tests, it is hoped that this approach will lead to improved
acceptance of machine learning in the medical field.


PMID: 11776737  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Int J Med Inform. 2001 Sep;63(1-2):41-50.

Feature mining and predictive model construction from severe trauma patient's
data.

Demsar J(1), Zupan B, Aoki N, Wall MJ, Granchi TH, Robert Beck J.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Computer and Information Sciences, University of Ljubljana, Tr.aska
25, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. janez.demsar@fri.uni-lj.si

In management of severe trauma patients, trauma surgeons need to decide which
patients are eligible for damage control. Such decision may be supported by
utilizing models that predict the patient's outcome. The study described in this 
paper investigates the possibility to construct patient outcome prediction models
from retrospective patient's data at the end of initial damage control surgery by
using feature mining and machine learning techniques. As the data used comprises 
rather excessive number of features, special attention was paid to the problem of
selecting only the most relevant features. We show that a small subset of
features may carry enough information to construct reasonably accurate prognostic
models. Furthermore, the techniques used in our study identified two factors,
namely the pH value when admitted to ICU and the worst partial active
thromboplastin time, to be of highest importance for prediction. This finding is 
pathophysiologically reasonable and represents two of three major problems with
severe trauma patients, metabolic acidosis, hypothermia, and coagulopathy.


PMID: 11518664  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Trauma. 2001 Jul;51(1):123-33.

Comparison of artificial intelligence techniques with UKTRISS for estimating
probability of survival after trauma. UK Trauma and Injury Severity Score.

Becalick DC(1), Coats TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Accident and Emergency, St. Bartholomew's and the Royal
London School of Medicine, Queen Mary and Westfield College, London, England.

BACKGROUND: The development of TRISS was principally a search for variables that 
correlated with outcome. It is not known, however, if linear statistical models
provide optimal results. Artificial intelligence techniques can answer this
question and also determine the most important predictor variables.
METHODS: An artificial neural network, using 16 anatomic and physiologic
predictor variables, was compared with the latest United Kingdom version of TRISS
model.
RESULTS: Both methods were 89.6% correct, but TRISS was significantly better by
the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (0.941 vs. 0.921, p < 
0.001). The artificial neural network, however, was better calibrated to the test
data (Hosmer-Lemeshow statistic, 58.3 vs. 105.4). Head injury, age, and chest
injury were the most important predictors by linear or nonlinear methods, whereas
respiration rate, heart rate, and systolic blood pressure were underused.
CONCLUSION: Prediction using linear statistics is adequate but not optimal. Only 
half the predictors have important predictive value, fewer still when using
linear classification. The strongest predictors swamp any nonlinearity observed
in other variables.

DOI: 10.1097/00005373-200107000-00020 
PMID: 11468479  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Trauma. 2001 Jul;51(1):134-40.

Trauma outcome analysis of a Jakarta University Hospital using the TRISS method: 
validation and limitation in comparison with the major trauma outcome study.
Trauma and Injury Severity Score.

Joosse P(1), Soedarmo S, Luitse JS, Ponsen KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Traumatology, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands. pieterjoosse@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: In this prospective study, the TRISS methodology is used to compare
trauma care at a University Hospital in Jakarta, Indonesia, with the standards
reported in the Major Trauma Outcome Study (MTOS).
METHODS: Between February 24, 1999, and July 1, 1999, all consecutive patients
with multiple and severe trauma were included in the study (n = 105). Survival
analysis was completed for 97 (92%) patients.
RESULTS: The majority of patients were men (81%), and the average age was 28
years. Ninety-five patients (98%) sustained blunt trauma, with motor vehicle
crashes being the most common (68%). The predicted mortality was 14% and the
observed mortality was 29%. The Z and M statistics were 7.87 and 0.843,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that in developing countries both institution-bound
factors and specific limitations in the TRISS methodology are responsible for the
difference between predicted and observed mortality, indicating the need for a
regional database.

DOI: 10.1097/00005373-200107000-00021 
PMID: 11468458  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Stud Health Technol Inform. 1998;52 Pt 1:665-9.

Automatic prediction of trauma registry procedure codes from emergency room
dictations.

Hersh WR(1), Leen TK, Rehfuss PS, Malveau S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Informatics and Outcomes Research, School of Medicine,
Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland, USA. hersh@ohsu.edu

Current natural language processing techniques for recognition of concepts in the
electronic medical record have been insufficient to allow their broad use for
coding information automatically. We have undertaken a preliminary investigation 
into the use of machine learning methods to recognize procedure codes from
emergency room dictations for a trauma registry. Our preliminary results indicate
moderate success, and we believe future enhancements with additional learning
techniques and selected natural language processing approaches will be fruitful.


PMID: 10384538  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Med Inform (Lond). 1998 Jan-Mar;23(1):1-18.

Expert system support using Bayesian belief networks in the prognosis of
head-injured patients of the ICU.

Nikiforidis GC(1), Sakellaropoulos GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Physics, School of Medicine, University of Patras,
Greece.

The present study concerns the construction and operation of a Bayesian
analytical system, namely a Bayesian belief network (BBN) for the prognosis at 24
h of head-injured patients of the intensive care unit. The construction of a BBN 
incorporates the maintenance of a large database including all the critical
variables corresponding to the specific clinical domain. This database is
processed to provide the necessary libraries of conditional probability values.
BBNs permit the combination of prognostic evidence in a cumulative manner and
provide a quantitative measure of certainty in the final decision. The user views
the changes at each step, thus being capable of deciding upon the necessary
pieces of information in order to reach a certain belief threshold. The system
produces results that are compatible with the opinions of medical experts
regarding the prognosis of patients exhibiting certain patterns of clinical or
laboratory data.


PMID: 9618679  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Artif Intell Med. 1997 Nov;11(3):215-39.

Application of autonomous neural network systems to medical pattern
classification tasks.

Lim CP(1), Harrison RF, Kennedy RL.

Author information: 
(1)School of Industrial Technology, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia.

This paper presents a study of the application of autonomously learning multiple 
neural network systems to medical pattern classification tasks. In our earlier
work, a hybrid neural network architecture has been developed for on-line
learning and probability estimation tasks. The network has been shown to be
capable of asymptotically achieving the Bayes optimal classification rates,
on-line, in a number of benchmark classification experiments. In the context of
pattern classification, however, the concept of multiple classifier systems has
been proposed to improve the performance of a single classifier. Thus, three
decision combination algorithms have been implemented to produce a multiple
neural network classifier system. Here the applicability of the system is
assessed using patient records in two medical domains. The first task is the
prognosis of patients admitted to coronary care units; whereas the second is the 
prediction of survival in trauma patients. The results are compared with those
from logistic regression models, and implications of the system as a useful
clinical diagnostic tool are discussed.


PMID: 9413607  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Unfallchirurg. 1997 Aug;100(8):689-91.

[Computer-assisted surgery. A critical evaluation].

[Article in German]

Börner M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Berufsgenossenschaftliche Unfallklinik, Frankfurt am Main.


PMID: 9381220  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Am Surg. 1997 Mar;63(3):275-81.

Prediction of trauma mortality using a neural network.

Izenberg SD(1), Williams MD, Luterman A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of South Alabama Medical Center, Mobile,
USA.

A neural network is a computerized construct consisting of input neurons (which
process input data) connected to hidden neurons (to mathematically manipulate
values they receive from all the input neurons) connected to output neurons (to
output a prediction). Neural networks are created and trained via multiple
iterations over data with known results. In 1993, 897 trauma patients were either
declared dead in the emergency room (ER; 76 cases), admitted to the intensive
care unit (427 cases, 36 deaths), or taken directly to the operating room (394
cases, 29 deaths). Using only data available from the ER, a neural network was
created, and 628 cases were randomly selected for training. After 268 iterations,
the network was trained to correctly predict death or survival in all 628 cases. 
This trained network was then tested on the other 269 cases without our providing
the death or survival result. Its overall accuracy was 91 per cent (244 of 269
cases). It was able to predict correctly 60 per cent (12 of 20 cases) of the
postoperative or post-intensive care unit admission deaths and 90 per cent (26 of
29 cases) of the deaths in the ER. Computerized neural networks can accurately
predict a trauma patient's fate based on inital ER presentation. The theory and
use of neural networks in predicting clinical outcome will be presented.


PMID: 9036899  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Artif Intell Med. 1996 Oct;8(5):493-504.

Concept formation vs. logistic regression: predicting death in trauma patients.

Hadzikadic M(1), Hakenewerth A, Bohren B, Norton J, Mehta B, Andrews C.

Author information: 
(1)Carolinas Medical Center, Department of Orthopaedic Informatics, Charlotte, NC
28203, USA. mirsad@uncc.edu

This study compares two classification models used to predict survival of injured
patients entering the emergency department. Concept formation is a machine
learning technique that summarizes known examples cases in the form of a tree.
After the tree is constructed, it can then be used to predict the classification 
of new cases. Logistic regression, on the other hand, is a statistical model that
allows for a quantitative relationship for a dichotomous event with several
independent variables. The outcome (dependent) variable must have only two
choices, e.g. does or does not occur, alive or dead, etc. The result of this
model is an equation which is then used to predict the probability of class
membership of a new case. The two models were evaluated on a trauma registry
database composed of information on all trauma patients admitted in 1992 to a
Level I trauma center. A total of 2155 records. representing all trauma patients 
admitted for more than 24 h or who died in the Emergency Department, were grouped
into two databases as follows: (1) discharge status of 'died' (containing 151
records), and (2) any discharge status other than 'died' (containing 2004
records). Both databases contained the same variables.

DOI: 10.1016/S0933-3657(96)00356-9 
PMID: 8955858  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Comput Biomed Res. 1995 Jun;28(3):191-210.

Extracting knowledge from large medical databases: an automated approach.

Bohren BF(1), Hadzikadic M, Hanley EN Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaeduic Surgery, Carolinas Medical Center, Charlotte, North
Carolina 28232, USA.

Tools which can uncover patterns in patients' records and then make predictions
based on that knowledge are and will continue to be high priority in many medical
informatics groups. These tools are impacting the performance of outcome studies 
by discovering patterns which can then be verified with standard statistical
tools. This paper demonstrates INC2.5, a general classification system, as a tool
for assisting physicians in the decision making process. INC2.5 gathers
information from patient records and builds a decision tree which is used to
assist physicians in predicting the outcome of new patients. The decision tree
will also reveal any patterns which the system found in the data. Successful
results of such a system can be used to enhance outcome studies as well as to
spread clinical information to areas with fewer resources.


PMID: 7554855  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Proc Annu Symp Comput Appl Med Care. 1995:198-202.

Concept formation vs. logistic regression: predicting death in trauma patients.

Hadzikadic M(1), Hakenewerth A, Bohren B, Norton J, Mehta B, Andrews C.

Author information: 
(1)Carolinas Medical Center/University of North Carolina, USA.

This paper discusses two classification models, one based on concept formation
and the other using standard logistic regression. The models are first explained 
in some detail and then evaluated on the same population of trauma patients. The 
goal of both systems is to predict the outcome of those patients. The results are
summarized and explained in terms of differing algorithms of the two models.


PMCID: PMC2579083
PMID: 8563266  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Trauma. 1993 Jun;34(6):863-8; discussion 868-70.

A new approach to probability of survival scoring for trauma quality assurance.

McGonigal MD(1), Cole J, Schwab CW, Kauder DR, Rotondo MF, Angood PB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania Medical Center, Philadelphia
19104.

This study examined the application of an artificial intelligence technique, the 
neural network (NET), in predicting probability of survival (Ps) for patients
with penetrating trauma. A NET is a computer construct that can detect complex
patterns within a data set. A NET must be "trained" by supplying a series of
input patterns and the corresponding expected output (e.g., survival). Once
trained, the NET can recall the proper outputs for a specific set of inputs. It
can also extrapolate correct outputs for patterns never before encountered. A
neural network was trained on Revised Trauma Score, Injury Severity Score, age,
and survival data contained in 3500 of 8300 state registry records of all
patients with penetrating trauma reported in Pennsylvania from 1987 through 1990.
The remaining 4800 records were analyzed by TRISS, ASCOT, and the trained NET.
Sensitivity (accuracy of predicting death) and specificity (accuracy of
predicting survival) were 0.840 and 0.985 for TRISS, 0.842 and 0.985 for ASCOT,
and 0.904 and 0.972 for the neural network. This represents a decrease in the
number of improperly classified ("unexpected") deaths, from 73 for TRISS and 72
for ASCOT, to 44 for the neural network. The increased sensitivity was
statistically significant by Chi-square analysis. The NET for penetrating trauma 
provided a more sensitive but less specific technique for calculating Ps than did
either TRISS or ASCOT. This translated into a 40% reduction in the number of
deaths requiring review, and the potential for more efficient use of quality
assurance resources.

DOI: 10.1097/00005373-199306000-00018 
PMID: 8315682  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Int J Clin Monit Comput. 1990;7(4):201-15.

Probability and the patient state space.

Coleman WP(1), Siegel JH, Giovannini I, De Gaetano A, Goodarzi S, Tacchino RM,
Sganga G.

Author information: 
(1)Maryland Institute for Emergency Medical Services Systems, Baltimore.

This paper describes work to develop a model-based system to support clinical
decision-making. In previous articles, we have developed (from 695 measurement
sets obtained from 148 patients) a physiologic state classification based on a
set of 11 cardiovascular and metabolic measurements. There is an R or reference
state, for stable ICU patients. Patients under (operative, traumatic, or
compensated septic) stress, or with (septic or hepatic) metabolic, respiratory,
or cardiac insufficiency are in the A, B, C, or D states, respectively. We wished
to make the state easier to measure and eventually available continuously,
automatically, and noninvasively, as well as reflecting a wider group of bodily
systems. The 5 centers define a 4 dimensional affine subspace, designated the
cardiovascular state space. Using eigenvector analysis, we have found four new
derived physiologic variables CV1, CV2, CV3, and CV4 that span the state space.
We have fit sets of linear regression equations that allow the patient's position
in the state space, and therefore his state, to be determined from more easily
obtainable sets of measurements. Further, we selected 1966 measurement sets from 
512 patients at two hospitals. We used the data from 250 of these patients to
define 13 prototypical types, namely survivors and deaths from various
combinations of sepsis, cardiogenic decompensation, cirrhosis, and pneumonitis,
following trauma or general surgery. For any future patient, the statistical
theory of Bayesian inference allows one to infer back from the measurements
observed to the probability of his being of any of these types and of surviving
or dying. We used this method to predict the outcome of the other 262 patients,
prospectively. Statistically, the predictions of survival or death were not
significantly different from the actual. For individual patients, the method
predicts a clinical course that closely follows the actual episodes in their
history. These results confirm and explain the validity of the concept of the
patient state and make the state easier to compute. The patient state and the
probability plot together help to stage, select, and evaluate therapy. They do
not replace the clinician's judgement, but rather are tools that help the
clinician to exercise judgement.


PMID: 2099969  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Radiobiol Radiother (Berl). 1989;30(2):143-9.

Use of the adaptive classifier for determination of LD50 in the acute radiation
disease.

Vodicka I, Hanus J, Hradil J.

In experiments on female Wistar rats a new method for the determination of LD50
is demonstrated and compared with the classical probit method using the same
experimental animals. The method is applicable for the computation of LD50 and
analogical quantities in man, too. The method is based on the application of an
adaptive logical circuit (ADALINE) trained for the dichotomous prognostic
classification of irradiated individuals quod vitam according to a set of
clinical and laboratory indicators registered on the third day after irradiation.
After the training procedure has been finished, the classifier makes possible an 
individual prognosis of survival or death. The analogue output signal according
to which the classification is performed changes continually from negative to
positive values and exhibits S-shaped relation to the radiation dose. Its zero
value corresponds to the position of LD50 on the abscissa. For the construction
of the searched function, i.e. for the optimum approximation of experimentally
obtained values of the output signal, the method of the changeable polyhedron was
applied belonging to the optimalization numerical methods used in the regulation 
technics. The computed value of LD50 was 7.80 Gy in rats very closely
corresponding with the value 7.61 Gy determined by means of the classical probit 
method.


PMID: 2748805  [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Am Psychoanal Assoc. 1988;36(1):125-51.

On working through: a model from artificial intelligence.

Galatzer-Levy RM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Chicago Institute for Psychoanalysis.

Working through is centrally important to clinical psychoanalysis. It is
inadequately explained in analytic theory. An artificial intelligence model of
the process is proposed. Models of problem solving show that the complexity of
necessary computation is an important determinant of how a problem is solved. Not
optimal, but only good enough solutions are usually found. The quality of
solutions depends on the time and resources available. Generally it is far easier
to use existing methods than to develop new approaches. When problems must be
solved in an emergency fashion, as in trauma, poor solutions are likely to
emerge. In studying the annealing of metals and other complex optimization
problems, a process, the Boltzman algorithm, was discovered, which continues the 
search for better solutions while gradually developing a coherent structure of
the overall solution. The algorithm provides a model both for psychoanalytic
working through and for the normally ongoing process of psychological development
and reworking whose deficiency is characteristic of much psychopathology. Working
through in the analytic situation is the reactivation of this normal process, and
a good analytic outcome is achieved when the process can continue without the
analyst. Properties of the Boltzman algorithm clarify such concepts as "optimal" 
frustration and anxiety which correspond to working in the area where the stable 
but not rigid structures emerge in the algorithms operation. These studies are an
example of how computer science and artificial intelligence are a potentially
rich source for psychoanalytic theory.

DOI: 10.1177/000306518803600106 
PMID: 3361064  [Indexed for MEDLINE]

